Project Gutenberg's The White Road of Mystery, by Philip Dana Orcutt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The White Road of Mystery
       The Note-Book of an American Ambulancier

Author: Philip Dana Orcutt

Release Date: March 19, 2019 [EBook #59102]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE ROAD OF MYSTERY ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)









                       THE WHITE ROAD OF MYSTERY

                          THE NOTE-BOOK OF AN
                          AMERICAN AMBULANCIER


[Illustration: AMERICAN FIELD SERVICE, SECTION XXXI
_at 21 rue Raynouard, Paris_
_The author is standing the seventh from the right_]


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE WHITE ROAD
                               OF MYSTERY

                          THE NOTE-BOOK OF AN
                          AMERICAN AMBULANCIER

                                   BY
                           PHILIP DANA ORCUTT
                    AMERICAN AMBULANCE FIELD SERVICE
                             _Section_ XXXI


                     _Illustrated with Photographs_


                      NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY
                   LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD
                                  1918


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            COPYRIGHT, 1918
                          BY JOHN LANE COMPANY



                           THE·PLIMPTON·PRESS
                           NORWOOD·MASS·U·S·A




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   TO

                           SECTION THIRTY-ONE

                      TO ALL OTHER SECTIONS OF THE

                         AMERICAN FIELD SERVICE

                         AND TO THOSE WHO HAVE
                           MADE THEM POSSIBLE




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                Preface


THE position of the ambulance driver at the front is much the same as
that of the grouse in open season: every one has a chance to take a shot
at him and he has no opportunity for retaliation. That is why so many
drivers entered aviation or artillery at the expiration of their term of
enlistment of six months.

This transferring came to an end when the American Government took over
the Ambulance Service. From then on, all drivers have been of necessity
enlisted men. The old American Ambulance, later called the American
Field Service, was a purely volunteer organization, and had no
connection with any government. It was made up of American citizens who
left civil life, paying their own expenses and furnishing their own
equipment, and in many cases their ambulances. These men, feeling that
America owed a debt to France, banded together to form the original
American Ambulance Service, which they laid on the altar of their
devotion to a true and great cause.

By virtue of the nature of his work the ambulance driver must always be
in the warmest places, and has a really unusual opportunity to observe
by moving from sector to sector and battle to battle what few other
branches of the service can see.

I had the honor to be associated with Section XXXI of the American Field
Service, and have endeavored to weave my simple tapestry from the
swiftly-moving pictures of life “in the zone” and out of it, as they
passed before me.

                                                                P. D. O.

BOSTON, _June, 1918_


------------------------------------------------------------------------



                                Contents


          CHAPTER                                           PAGE
             I. THE WHITE ROAD OF MYSTERY                   19

            II. IN ACTION                                   41

           III. EN REPOS                                    87

            IV. AT THE FRONT                               117

             V. L’ENVOI                                    151

                GLOSSARY                                   171


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             Illustrations


                                                       PAGE
             AMERICAN FIELD SERVICE, SECTION XXXI         4

             A SAUCISSE                                  33

             BRANCARDIERS LOADING AN AMBULANCE           57

             AN ABRI                                     77

             A DIVISION EN REPOS                         95

             NORMAL TRAFFIC AT THE FRONT                131

             TAKING A LOAD FROM THE ABRI                147


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Prelude


THE _sweet, clear notes of a bugle come faintly up to me through the
cool air of morning, and as the sound dies away I hear the great guns
begin their bombardment, the rumbling echoes merging into the matin
chimes wafted across the valley from some small church as yet unscarred
by Mars._

_Reveille, the summons, calls man from his peaceful, prenatal slumber,
rouses him and bids him prepare for what the world will send him. Man
goes forth to meet the world, and struggles through his allotted time
until the bells of God ring for him to fold himself in his soul and
sleep._


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   I

                       THE WHITE ROAD OF MYSTERY


A SHARP whistle cuts the tense silence. It is the signal to start. It
marks the line which breaks the past from the future; it is the boundary
between the Known and the Unknown, and the frontier where duty and
service merge. For a second, as the motors race, there is
commotion—quickly settling into a rhythmic whir. The men are in their
seats with somewhat of an echo of that whir in their hearts. The
lieutenant’s car rolls slowly out of the gate, followed by the _chef’s_,
and in turn by the others of the section, and as the last car crosses
the threshold there is a cheer from the friends gathered to bid us
Godspeed,—for Section XXXI is born.

                  *       *       *       *       *

WE are off. We do not know where we are going. After a number of
interminable delays and halts we pass through the gates of the city, and
leave behind the last vestige of the Known. Ahead of us the road
stretches white in the sunlight—the white road of mystery leading on to
adventure and redemption. We have ceased to be our own masters. We are
units, cogs in the machine, infinitesimal pawns in the giant game, and
move as the dust which rises from the car ahead—where we know not, why
we know not,—and how we often wonder!

                  *       *       *       *       *

CONVOY formation allows, by the book, for an interval of twenty feet
between cars when passing through cities, and for one hundred feet when
in the country. The flesh, however, is weak. In cities it is rare indeed
to see cars separated by more than a nose except in spasms, while in the
country a matter of miles is unimportant. A convoy is like a pack of
dogs on the hunt, racing pell mell up hill and down dale one minute, and
crawling the next, with an occasional dog straying off and losing itself
for an indefinite length of time.

For example, we come to some small town where we are to have lunch. We
arrive in a hurry and with much dust, the first few cars in close
formation, nose to tail, the last a few miles in the rear. Suddenly the
driver of the leading car, who has been admiring the scenery on the
right of the road, sees the _chef_ standing on the left making frantic
motions for him to stop. Perhaps the driver puts out his hand, perhaps
he does not. At any rate, he applies the brakes and comes to a dead
stop—for an instant. The driver of the second car may have been
adjusting his carburetor or observing an aeroplane, or a peasant girl,
or a map—the exact object is beside the question. He suddenly comes to
earth when he finds his charge valiantly trying to climb over the car in
front—more brakes. Of course there is a third car, and possibly a
fourth, or more, which demand attention. The final result advances the
leading car some feet, decreases the supply of spare radiators, and as a
rule does not contribute to the general harmony.

One or more cars must always have taken the wrong road, and lead a hare
and hound chase for some minutes before the final roundup, leaving for
clues numerous peasants who, when queried, always know just where it
went. Of course, by the law of chance, some one of these has undoubtedly
seen it, and the lost is eventually found.

There was one particular member of our section who was a rover at soul,
and led several interesting hunts. A little later in the season this
same rover took a by-road and started through the Hesse Forest for
Germany. Our whole pack was called out, and after an exciting chase he
was finally caught and convinced of his error. Fortunately for both him
and us the _chef_ has a sense of humor, and the section, in spite of our
many innocent attempts to disintegrate it and take individual excursions
to different parts of France, continues to be a unit.

For five days we proceed thus, with the white road stretching out in
front and the brown dust trailing behind. We stop to get gasoline, to
eat, and to sleep. We begin to near the front, and pass through town
after town of roofless houses, shattered churches, and scattered homes.
Through fields dotted with wooden crosses with the tricolored ribbon,
and pock-marked with shell-holes. We pass aeroplane hangars and
batteries of guns. We see more _saucisses_ in the sky and soldiers on
the ground. The hand of the Hun lies heavy on the land, and his poison
breath scorches the grass of the fields. We see fewer civilians and more
steel helmets, and yet the rumble of the guns is no louder. But there is
a certain breath of power and energy in the air, and one feels himself
waiting for something to happen.

Something does—an infuriated bull charges Rover’s car and picks off one
of his headlights. Rover reverses hastily and unhesitatingly into the
car behind, while the farmer’s wife makes her appearance, drives off the
bull, and saves Rover from extermination.

Then, one afternoon, we arrive at our point of embarkation, so to speak.
It is Bar-le-Duc, sixty kilometres from Verdun, and by virtue of its
being the one city in many miles, the meeting place of the world, which
is to say, of course, our sector of front—when _en repos_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

BAR-LE-DUC, the old stronghold of the feudal dukes of Bar, nestling in
the valley on the banks of the slow-moving Ornain, tributary to the
River Marne, and with _la ville haute_ trespassing far onto one ridge,
and the ruined castle frowning down from the other, is a town of
memories and traditions which greets this war as but another chapter in
the never-ending book of its history. It has two large and ancient
cathedrals, the one crowning the upper city—now quite naturally in
ruins, as the enemy, by this time a connoisseur in churches, makes
frequent air raids. The chateau—considered quite modern as it is but two
hundred years of age—has mellowed into the surroundings by now, and
forms a sufficiently integral part of the beauty of the city to be
likewise a target for our “considerate” neighbor.

One evening, as the last rays of the sun glinted from its roof, it stood
solid and strong,—ready to do battle with the elements for many
centuries more, but while the city lay quiet in the cold moonlight of an
August night, the sound of purring motors broke the silence from above.
The _contre-avions_ crashed, and the yellow shrapnel broke in the sky
often a mile from its invisible target, and never near enough to arrest
the advance of the raiders, who suddenly shut off their motors and, as
often before, swooped silently down on their motionless prey, and
dropped their bombs. Then, turning on their motors, they climbed and
glided over the city again and again until, having dropped their entire
cargo, they flew off. But in the morning the chateau no longer stood
proudly up from the river mist, and another buttress against the ravages
of the elements had crumbled into untimely ruins.

The main street of the town is denuded of its plate glass, and more
houses crumble each time the enemy reports “military advantage gained”
by an indiscriminate slaughter of the future crop of France’s defenders,
and those heroic souls who bear them.

The town is noted for its manufactures, its wines, and its _confitures_.
As to the first-named I know little, but as to the merits of its wines,
its _liqueurs_, and its _confitures_ I cannot say enough, nor can many
thousands of others who seek out Bar-le-Duc as the one sanctuary from
the mud and deprivations of the rest of their existence, and bask
gloriously in the discomforts of its civilization for a few stolen
hours.

                  *       *       *       *       *

CONVOY formation again, the cars freshly washed and glistening in the
sunlight,—for a few minutes, before the grey cloud of dust pouring from
the cars in front settles on us again. We come to a turn. A large sign
greets us, _Souilly—vers Verdun_, emphasized by a giant arrow pointing
in the direction we take. We are instantly sure that this is to be our
headquarters. Verdun is a name we have long wished to visualize. At the
first stop we tell each other the great news. While we are grouped in
the road a big grey limousine carrying three generals dashes past. Every
one salutes, and by a miracle we are noticed and the salute is returned.
Cheerful Liar at once informs us that they were Joffre, Petain, and—he
is at a loss for the third name. We help him out—Hindenburg perhaps.

But we are doomed to bitter disappointment. Thirty kilometres from the
famous city we are given orders to park our cars in a pile of ruins
formerly known as Erize—Erize la petite, and well named.

                  *       *       *       *       *

ERIZE is, without exception, the dullest place beneath the sun—a small
town, now a mass of crumbling ruins, holding not above two dozen
civilians, who are, for the most part, still less interesting than the
town. Of course, there are Grand’mère and Grand-père, no relation to
each other, but so christened by us because they are the only two
octogenarians here. Grand’mère is not properly from Erize. Her home is
somewhere north of Verdun, in a town with an unpronounceable name and
long since destroyed. She, herself, carries proudly on her wrinkled
forehead a two-inch scar from shrapnel, and informs us tearfully that
her two sons have died in action, “_pour la patrie_,” she concludes,
with a faint smile.

I met Grand’mère for the first time when I picked an unripe apple from
an overburdened tree. The old woman appeared from the depths of a nearby
building and advanced menacingly towards me, hobbling along on a cane,
and pouring forth as she came an unintelligible tirade from which I
gathered that the apple reposing guiltily in my hand was hers—not mine.
A single _franc_ served to wreathe her face in smiles and to obtain
undisputed claim to the apple and her good graces in the future. _Ira
furor brevis est._ I afterwards learned that houses in Erize rent for
fifty _francs_ a year, this including several acres of farm land.

Grand-père, aged ninety-eight, I met near the temporary kitchen where
the cook was giving him a cup of _Pinard_, which he drank eagerly, while
Grand’mère gave him wise counsel, to which he replied as Omar Khayyam
might have done.

But they are the only characters of interest here. The fields
surrounding the town have as their redeeming feature a system of old
trenches, with much barbed wire and an occasional shell-fragment to
reward the searcher. The German advance was stopped less than a mile
from here, and the trenches have been used since for practice.

The dugouts interest us particularly. We are later to become surfeited
with them, but as yet they are still delightfully novel. The rumble of
the guns can be heard plainly from here, and at rare intervals a
_saucisse_ rises on the horizon, much to our joy and excitement.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE _saucisse_ is a balloon shaped like a sausage—hence its name. At the
front they are in the sky by the hundreds on both sides to direct the
fire of the artillery and to observe the enemy’s operations generally.
They are consequently made the objective of the aeroplane, and many are
brought down every day. The aeroplane dodges along from cloud to cloud,
and when he is just over the _saucisse_ suddenly swoops down, and with a
tic-tic-tic from his machine-gun the bag crumples up in a cloud of black
smoke and flames, the observer jumps out with his parachute, and the
aeroplane dashes off pursued by many shells.

In the balloons the observers all have parachutes and usually make their
escape, although often they have to spend a little time dangling from
the limb of some tree.

                  *       *       *       *       *

WE are told not to stray far, as the order to move may come at any
moment. We take walks through the country, and always on returning find
the section with “no news,”—but at last the order comes.


[Illustration: A SAUCISSE]


We have gotten our baggage ready, and are sitting around in the darkness
smoking our pipes and thinking. Tomorrow we are going up to the lines. A
big attack has been scheduled, and we are to take care of the wounded.
It is to be our first work, and any fighting at all seems a “big attack”
to us. We are a green section, fresh from Paris. We have never heard a
shell whistle, and have been thrilled by the sound of guns twenty miles
away. What will be our sensations face to face with the real thing? We
are a bit nervous. There is some tension. We discuss the probable extent
of the attack and debate as to its success. This leads us nowhere, and
after we have pledged each other and the section “_Bonne chance_” in a
glass of cognac from a bottle opened for the occasion, we turn in.

                  *       *       *       *       *

IT is cold and chill, and a steady drizzle is oozing from the sky above
into the earth beneath, and is making it soft and slippery. I awake,
yawn, stretch sleepily, and gaze out into the grey dejection of the
morning. I have been sleeping luxuriously on the floor of an ambulance,
wedged in between two trunks and a duffle-bag.

“Well, this is ‘_der Tag_’ for us,” I remark to a friend, who has spent
the night on top of the two trunks.

He stops eating my jam for an instant and agrees with me. Then, on
second thought, he generously offers me some jam. I sit up and struggle
for a few seconds with a piece of the bread we carry for nourishment and
defence, spread some jam on it, get out a bottle of Sauterne (at the
front wine is wine at all hours of the day and night), and we settle
down to breakfast. Breakfast is a purely personal investment, as it
officially consists of coffee—so called by courtesy—and bread. The
French bread comes in round loaves a foot in diameter, and is never
issued until four days old, and is often aged ten or more before we see
it. Fresh bread, it is believed, would give a soldier indigestion.
French officialdom believes the same evil of water, and provides each
soldier with a quart a day of cheap red wine called, in the _argot_ of
the trenches, _Pinard_. Breakfast over, we make our way to the barn, our
official quarters, by means of stepping-stones previously laid from the
car, and chat with the other members of the section.

Today we are moving up into the zone of fire itself, and are somewhat
excited. The entire section is to move to a little destroyed town,
Ville-sur-Couzances. From there six cars are always to be on duty taking
care of our first wounded. The _chef_ and the _sous-chef_ join us
presently. They went up yesterday and were shown the _postes_, and
consequently come in for a storm of questions. The _sous-chef_ tells us
that today we shall hear them “whistle both ways.” We are thrilled. He
asks us if we are ready. We are—even Rover. Then the lieutenant comes
in. He speaks a few words to the _chef_. The _chef_ blows his whistle
four times. It is the signal for assembly. He gives us a few
instructions. We run to our cars. One whistle—we crank up. Two
whistles—the leading ambulance painfully and noisily tears itself from
its bed of mud. The others follow in regular succession, until the last
car melts into the grey, cold mist. When shall we see Erize again?


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   II

                               IN ACTION


VILLE-SUR-COUZANCES is also at this time the headquarters of Section
XXIX, which has just lost two men, and Section LXIX, which is a
gear-shift section,—we are quite proudly Fords. Section XIX, French,
whom we are relieving, examines us critically, but makes no audible
comments. To the six of us chosen for the first “roll” there is but one
impatient thought. We hear “Napoleon”—a French private attached to our
section for _ravitaillement_ because he could do nothing else—telling
the cook and several unwilling assistants how to dispose of the field
range. In the French manner, instead of ignoring him, the stove is
discarded, and a Latin argument follows much to the amusement if not to
the edification of the onlookers. This does not concern us, and as soon
as we get the order to roll we are blithely off.

It is only a few minutes’ run to Brocourt, where the _triage_, or front
hospital, is located. This is like a giant hangar in shape, but, instead
of the mottled green, blue, and grey _camouflage_ of the latter, it is
brilliantly white with a red cross fifty feet square surmounting it.
Despite this fact, it is bombed and shelled regularly by the “merciful”
Hun. We pass through the shattered town, its church tower still
standing, by a miracle, and pointing its scarred and violated finger to
the heavens with the silent appeal—“Avenge!”

The _sous-chef_, who is sitting beside me, tells me to put on my helmet
and to sling my mask over my shoulder. From here on men “go west”
suddenly, and in their boots. We pass over a short rise in sight of the
German _saucisses_, and down a steep and long hill into Récicourt. Of
that hill there is much to remember—but today it is just steep, and
green, and has many trees by the roadside loaded down with much unripe
fruit. Past the sentry, over the bridge which the Boche hit yesterday
with an eight-inch shell—which failed to explode and bounced into the
muddy river—and we are at the relay station. It is a barn with half the
roof and a goodly portion of the walls missing. We use this to screen
the cars from the eyes of raiding enemy aeroplanes, of which there are
many.

Two of us are at once assigned to run to the _poste de secours_, P 2,
where just now we are to keep two cars, the other four remaining at the
relay station. Again luck is with me, and I am in the first car to roll.
Our run is entirely through the woods, in the Hesse Forest, and as the
enemy will not be able to see us we rejoice—but we soon learn not to
rejoice prematurely. There is hardly a man in sight as we struggle along
through the mud, but beside the road everywhere, often spilling into it,
lie piles of shells, 75’s, 155’s, and _torpilles_ by the thousand,
apparently arranged haphazardly. The _torpille_ is a winged and
particularly deadly shell, first cousin to the German _minniewerfer_,
and differing essentially only in range. The _maréchal des logis_
informs us encouragingly that the one lying in the middle of the road
which we just ran over was a Boche which did not explode when it landed,
and has not—yet.

Everything is wrapped in the silence of the grave except for an
occasional crash as some battery sends its message into Germany. We
arrive at P 2, which is distinguished from the rest of the world by a
foot square of white cotton and the universal red cross. There is room
inside the gate—a log dyke against the mud—to park the cars: “Room
sideways or deep,” as one member of the section described it as he
watched his boots sink steadily into the mud.

The _sous-chef_ calls us around him and gives us our detailed
instructions, for he is going back by the first car. Suddenly, as we are
listening to him attentively, there is a piercing _zz-chung_, and a 250
lands within a hundred yards with a dull crash and a geyser of trees,
dirt, and black smoke. We look at him inquiringly and he points to the
_abri_. We nod and adjourn to it. A few more shells follow, then all is
peaceful again, while the French batteries around us hammer away at the
Germans in their turn. We take lunch on a rustic table under the trees
and thoroughly enjoy having our tin plates rattled by the concussion of
the guns, while a Frenchman explains to us the difference in sound
between an _arrivée_ and a _départ_.

Such is the initiation. Then while we, as yet mere amateurs, eat
peacefully, relishing the novelty of the situation, and buoyed up by our
first excitement, a short procession passes. It is a group of men
carrying stretchers on which are what were men a few minutes before,
who, standing within talking distance of us, were blown out of existence
by the shells which whistled over our heads and, bursting, scattered
_éclats_ and dirt on the steel roof that sheltered us. It is a side of
the front which has not touched us deeply before, a side which in the
first few days of the ordeal by fire impresses itself more and more on
the novice, until he learns to temper the realization with philosophy
and the so-called humor of the front. Then is the veteran in embryo.

The ambulance sections are divided into two classes—gear-shift and Ford.
The gear-shift sections are composed of Fiats, Berliets, or some other
French car. They carry five _couchés_ or eight _assis_, and have two men
to a car. The French Army ambulances are all gear-shift, and the
gear-shift sections included in the American Field Service all
originally belonged to the French Government. Before the American
Government took over the Ambulance Corps, the American Field Service, in
addition to sending out Ford sections as quickly as they were subscribed
in America, had been gradually absorbing the French Ambulance System,
relieving with its own men the French drivers who could then serve in
the trenches, and including those sections among its own.

The Ford sections carried three _couchés_ or four _assis_, and had one
driver, although many sections had extra men to help out. A Ford section
then, when complete, consisted of twenty ambulances, one Ford
_camionnette_ or truck, which went for food and carried spare parts and
often baggage, one French _camionnette_, a one-ton truck, which carried
tools, French mechanics, and other spare parts, one large White truck
with kitchen trailer, one Ford touring-car for the _chef_, and a more or
less high-powered touring car for the lieutenant. The personnel was one
French lieutenant, who was the connecting link between the organization
and the government, and was responsible to the latter for the actions of
the section; one _chef_, who was an American chosen by the organization
from the _sous-chefs_ of one of the sections in the field; one or two
_sous-chefs_, chosen by the _chef_ from the members of his or some other
section; twenty drivers, often an odd number of assistant drivers, an
American paid mechanic, and an odd number of French mechanics, cooks,
and clerks.

The lieutenant received the orders and was responsible to the army for
their execution. The lieutenant gave the _chef_ his orders, and the
_chef_ was responsible to him for their execution by the section. The
_sous-chefs_ were the _chef’s_ assistants.

The routine when at work is for a certain number of cars to be on duty
at one time, the number depending on the work. The section is divided
into shifts of the number of cars required. When on duty a man must
always have his car and himself ready to “roll,” and when off duty,
after putting his car in condition, must rest so as to be in shape for
his next turn. When the work is heavy, the cars on duty are rolling all
the time with very little opportunity for food or rest for the driver;
consequently, for a man not to get himself and his car ready in this
period of rest means that the service is weakened; and that, if other
cars go _en panne_ unavoidably, it is possibly crippled—and lives may be
lost. When the work is light, men are usually twenty-four hours on and
forty-eight off; when moderate, twenty-four on and twenty-four off; when
stiff, forty-eight on and twenty-four off, and during an attack almost
steadily on. The longest stretch that my section kept its men
continuously at work was seven days and nights in the Verdun sector
during an attack, and we were compelled to cease then only because too
few of our cars were left able to roll to carry the wounded.

From headquarters the day’s shift is sent to the relay station, and from
there cars go as needed to the _postes de secours_. The _postes_ are as
near the trenches as it is possible for the cars to go, and some can be
visited only at night. The wounded are brought to these by the
_brancardiers_ through the _boyaux_, or communication trenches, and
usually have their first attention here. After first aid has been
administered, and when there are enough for a load, or there is a
serious case, the car goes to the _triage_, stopping at the relay
station, from which a car is sent to the _poste_ to replace the first,
which returns to the relay station directly from the hospital.

The hospitals also are divided into two main classes, the _triages_, or
front hospitals in the zone of fire, and the H.O.E.’s, hospitals of
evacuation, anywhere back of the fines. The hospital of evacuation is
the third of the four stages through which a wounded man passes. The
first is the front-line dressing station, the _abri_; the second, if the
wound is at all serious, is the _triage_; the third, if serious enough,
is the hospital of evacuation; and the fourth, if the soldier has been
confined to the hospital for ten or more days, is the ten-day
_permission_ to Paris, Nice, or some other place of his choice. Then
these classes, in some cases, are subdivided into separate hospitals for
_couchés_, _assis_, and _malades_.

These subdivisions sometimes make complications, as in the case of one
driver who was given what appeared to be a serious case to take to the
_couché_ hospital. While on the way, however, the serious case revived
sufficiently to find his canteen. After a few swallows he felt a
pleasant warmth within, for French canteens are not filled with water,
and sat up better to observe his surroundings and to make
uncomplimentary remarks to the driver. Arrived at the hospital, the
_brancardiers_ lifted the curtain at the rear of the car, and seeing the
patient sitting up and smoking a cigarette, apparently in good health,
they refused to take him, and sent the car on to the _assis_ hospital.
Overcome by his undue exertion, the wounded man lay down again, and by
the time the ambulance had reached the other hospital was peacefully
dozing on the floor. The _brancardiers_ shook their heads, and sent the
car back to the _couché_ hospital. Somewhat annoyed by this time, the
_ambulancier_ did not drive with the same care, and the jolts aroused
the incensed _poilu_, who sat up and began to ask personal questions.
The driver, not wishing to continue his trips between the two hospitals
for the duration of the war, stopped the car outside the _couché_
hospital, and, seeing his patient sitting up, put him definitely to
sleep with a tire tool, and sent him in by the uncomplaining
_brancardiers_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

WE spend a good part of our time in the _abri_. Just now the Boche
appears to have taken a particular dislike to this part of the sector,
for he is strafing it most unmercifully. We do not doubt at all that it
is because we are here. The fact that there are six thousand French guns
massed in the woods, so near together that you cannot walk a dozen feet
without tripping over one, may, of course, have something to do with the
enemy’s vindictiveness, but that does not occur to us.

After taking an hour or two of interrupted sleep in the _abri_, we step
out in the early morning to get a breath of fresh air and to untangle
our cramped muscles. A shell or two whines in uncomfortably near, and we
are convinced that the enemy knows our every move by instinct. When we
sit in the _abri_ during the day, and there is never a second that we do
not hear the whine of at least one shell overhead, and the intervals
between shells striking near enough to shake the _abri_ and rattle
_éclats_ on its steel roof grow less, we are convinced the Boche is
searching for _our dugout_. When I am making a run to P 2, and, rounding
Dead Horse Corner, start on the last stretch, and a shell knocks a tree
across the road a hundred feet ahead, blocking us completely, and two
more shells drop on the road by the tree, two more strike ten yards on
our right, and another lands within fifteen feet on our left, there is
no doubt in my mind that the enemy is after me.

In reality, of course, the enemy has no idea where the _abris_ are
located, and just now is simply taking a few chance shots at a likely
corner—but every man _knows_ that every shell he hears is meant for him
personally,—all of which goes to prove how egotistical we really are.

                  *       *       *       *       *

AS one man remarked, “Our life out here is just one d— _brancardier_
after another.” The _brancardiers_, or stretcher-bearers, include the
musicians—for the band does not play at the front,—the exchanged
prisoners who are pledged to do no combatant work, and others who
volunteer for or are assigned to this work. These men are in the
front-line trenches, where they bandage wounded men as they are hit, and
carry them to the front _abri_, where the _major_, army doctor, gives
them more careful attention. At the front _abri_ are other
_brancardiers_, who then take charge of these men and load them into our
cars. We arrive at the hospital, and _brancardiers_ there unload the
ambulances and carry in the wounded. Inside the hospital other
_brancardiers_ nurse the wounded, as no women nurses are allowed in the
_triage_ hospitals.


[Illustration: BRANCARDIERS LOADING AN AMBULANCE
COPYRIGHT—INTERNATIONAL FILM SERVICE CO., INC.]


A callous, hardened, dulled class of men, absolutely lacking in
sentiment, yet doing a noble and heroic work. Who could do their work
without becoming callous—or insane? We curse them often when they put a
man in the car upside down or drop him, but we forget that when the
infantry goes _en repos_, the _brancardiers_ stay at their posts, going
out into No Man’s Land every hour to bring in a countryman or an enemy.
When, standing by the car at P 3, I see two _brancardiers_ carrying a
man up from the _abri_ and, after noticing that both his arms are
broken, one in two places, that both legs are broken, that a bloody
bandage covers his chest, and that the white band around his head is
staining red, I see them drop him when a shell screams overhead, I curse
them. But I forget that for the past two nights, with their _abri_
filled with chlorine gas, these same men have toiled faithfully in
suffocating gasmasks, bringing in the wounded, caring for them, and
loading them on our cars. I forget that these men have probably not had
an hour’s consecutive sleep for weeks and that it may be weeks before
they have again; that it is months since they last saw a dry foot of
ground, or felt that for a moment they were free of the ever present
expectation of sudden death. It is something to remember, and it is to
wonder rather how they do these things at all than why they seem at
times a little careless or a bit tired.

Would the _brancardier_ tell you this? When he sees you he asks after
your comrades. He takes you in and gives you a cigarette and some
_Pinard_ in a battered cup, and tries to find you a place to rest, all
the time telling you cheerful stories and amusing incidents.

The Staff is the brains of the army; Aviation, the eyes; the Artillery,
the voice; the Infantry and Cavalry, the arms; the Engineers, the hands;
the Transportation, the legs; the People behind it, the body; but the
_Brancardier_ is the soul.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THERE are sounds outside of a klaxon being worked vigorously. However,
we have several dozing Frenchmen inside the _abri_ who are making
similar noises, so nothing dawns upon our sleepy senses for some minutes
while the owner of the klaxon searches for the _abri_. This is dangerous
business, because on all sides are barbed wire, shell-holes, and other
_abris_. Also, as this one is located in the corner of a graveyard,
there is danger that the searcher will wander on and uproot a dozen or
more wooden crosses in the search. At last he discovers the right one by
falling down the pit we called stairs before the rain set in. A violent
monologue arouses us from our dozing comfortlessness, and we learn that
a car is wanted at P 2. I am next on call, so I slowly and painfully
unwind myself from a support and two pairs of legs, and, with the man
who rides with me, make my way into the outer darkness.

We get the car and start off down the road with no lights anywhere, and
pray that everything coming the other way keeps to its side of the road
and goes slowly. There is always something coming the other way—and your
way, a steady succession of _camions_ in the centre of the road, and of
artillery trains on the side. The _camions_ are mostly very heavy and
very powerful, and have no compunction at all about what they run into,
as they know that it cannot harm them. The ammunition trains consist of
batteries of 75’s, little framework teams with _torpilles_ fitting in
small compartments like eggs, and other such vehicles in tow of a number
of mules, with the driver invariably asleep. The traffic, however, in
spite of the pitch darkness, would be endurable if it were not for the
mud which often comes up to the hubs. It is a slimy mud, and if spread
thinly is extremely slippery. On the roads it is rarely spread thinly,
and when one gets out to push he often sinks in up to the knee. Then of
course there is always the whine of _arrivées_ and _départs_ passing
overhead, and the occasional crump of a German 77 or 150 landing near at
hand.

The French and the German gunners play a little game every night with
supply trains and shells. The shells are trumps. The object is to see
who can play the more “cards” without being trumped. An artillery train
counts one, a _camionnette_ two, a _camion_ five—because it blocks the
road for some time when hit, and gives the enemy time to trump more
cards—two ambulances give a win, and if a gun is hit the enemy is
disqualified. The game is very interesting—for the artillery.

This modernized blindman’s buff is carried on at its best in the early
hours of the morning before the game becomes too free-for-all to score
carefully, and most of the cars are returned to the “pack”—out of the
zone of fire—to wait for the next evening’s fun. At this time the roads
are crowded, and the game is at its height. As the fun increases for the
judges, however, it decreases for the players,—that is to say the
“cards.” The prospect of being trumped is not a pleasant anticipation,
although it keeps up the interest and prevents _ennui_. After an hour or
so of sport the going becomes very bad, as there are always many horses
killed, and when the fighting is at all severe there is no time to bury
them. Then, too, the narrow gauge railway crossing the road every few
rods is often hit, and left, like a steel octopus, with its twisted
tentacles stretching out in all directions. These add to the sport
hugely, and our chief consolation is to imagine the Boche over on his
side having fully as bad if not a worse time than we.

“This or the next?” inquires my companion in reference to a cross-road
which appears on our right.

Having no idea I answer, “This one,” and we turn. An unaccountable
number of jounces greets us as we continue.

“They must have strafed this road a good bit since our last roll,” my
friend comments.

The going is worse, and we stop to get our bearings. We shout and
presently a form rises from the darkness. At any hour of the day or
night it is possible to rouse by one or more shouts any number of men
anywhere. You can see no one, as the world, for obvious reasons, lives
underground in the rabbit burrows of _abris_, but when needed comes
forth in force. This is very convenient, as often when driving at night
one finds his car stuck in the middle of a new and large shell-hole, and
help is necessary. We ask our location.

“_Ah, oui, M’sieu, P-trois!_”

We have come by error to the artillery _poste_ and must retrace our way.
We exchange cigarettes with the friendly _brancardier_ and set off
again. At last we get back on the right road, and after making another
turn are nearing the _poste_. In the last gleams from a star-shell ahead
we see something grey by the side of the road. As we are in the woods I
take a quick look with my flash. It is one of our ambulances. My friend
and I look at each other, and are mutually glad that it is too dark to
see each other’s face. A careful survey of the surroundings yields
nothing, and we press on—in silence. We jolt into the _poste_ with
racing motor and wheels clogged with mud, and go down into the very
welcome _abri_. Our friends there know nothing about the ambulance, so
we hope for the best.

Friendships at the front are for the most part sincere—but sometimes
short.

                  *       *       *       *       *

IT is about ten o’clock in the evening. We have been given a load at P 2
and are returning to the hospital. We turn from the battered Bois
d’Avocourt into the Bois de Récicourt, and passing through the Bois de
Pommiers roll into the valley. We cross through the town, and when the
sentry lifts the gate pull slowly up the hill towards Brocourt.
Punctually at five-thirty this evening twelve shells whistled over
Récicourt and struck the hill, but fortunately not the road.

This hill makes a perfect target for the Boche, for if he falls short he
hits the town, if he overshoots he will probably hit the hospital, and
if he hits what he aims at he may get the road. Consequently there are
intermittent bombardments at all hours of the day and night—preferably
at night as there is more traffic on the roads. There is one time that
the Boche never fails to greet us. That is five-thirty. Every day while
I was there, as the hour struck, or would have struck had the clock been
left to strike it, twelve shells whistled over Récicourt and knocked
fruit from the orchard on the hill. If the Boche were sentimental, we
would say it was the early twilight that made him do this, but as we
remember Belgium we call it habit. There are several big _rôtis_ set up
by the roadside like kilo-stones to remind us that to roll at
five-thirty is _verboten_.

For some unexplained and mysterious reason many of the German shells do
not explode. Whether this is from faulty workmanship or defective fuses
or materials we do not know, but it causes the _poilus_ much amusement.
There will be the whine of an _arrivée_ and a dull thud as it strikes
the ground, but no explosion. Every Frenchman present immediately roars
with laughter and shouts, “_Rôti! Rôti!_”

We crawl up the hill, the road luckily having escaped injury during the
afternoon, and at length reach the hospital. Then, much lightened, we
start back. Coasting slowly down the hill we have a perfect opportunity
to observe the horizon.

The sky tonight is softly radiant, a velvety black with myriads of
brilliant stars in the upper heavens. Opposite us is another hill,
crowned with trees which break gently into the skyline. Above these the
sky flashes and sparkles in iridescent glory. The thundering batteries
light up everything with brilliant flashes, and the star-shells
springing up over No Man’s Land hang for an instant high in the air with
dazzling brilliancy, and then fading, drift slowly earthward. The
artillery signals (Verrey Lights, rockets carrying on their sticks one,
two, three, and four lights) dart up everywhere. A raider purrs
overhead, and golden bursts of shrapnel crack in the sky. All merge
together, first one, then another standing forth to catch the eye for a
brief second, the kaleidoscopic brilliancy lifting one up out of the
depths of the mire to forget for a moment why these lights
flare—treacherous will o’ the wisps leading men on to death—and one sees
only the wonderful beauty of the scene: a picture impressed on the
memory which makes all seem worth while. One sight of these causes the
discomforts and dangers of the day’s work to fade, and they become a
symbol—a pillar of fire leading on to the victory that is coming when
Right shall have conquered Might, and the tortured world can again
breathe freely.

                  *       *       *       *       *

IT is night, and the chill mist has settled close to the ground. It is
cold and damp, but the front is always cold and damp so no one comments
on it. We are several feet underground and that augments the chill
somewhat, but as here one lives underground he does not think of that.
There is a little breeze outside, for the burlap that hangs at the foot
of the stairs leading to the outer world quivers, and the lone candle
flickers uncertainly, casting weird shadows from the black steel roof on
the sleeping forms. The sides of the _abri_ are lined with bunks, wooden
frames covered with wire netting, upon which lie sprawled
_brancardiers_, _poilus_, and in one an American has managed to locate
himself quite comfortably. The _abri_ is short, and the few bunks are at
a premium.

Two of our men are asleep,—one on the floor, another in a bunk. The rest
of us wrap our coats around us and smoke pensively. We think of home,
and wonder what our friends there are doing just now. It is August and
slightly after midnight. The time difference makes it a few minutes past
six in the States. At the seashore they are coming in from canoeing and
swimming, sitting around before dinner, discussing the plans for the
evening and the happenings of the day. At the mountains they are
finishing rounds of golf or sets of tennis, and the pink and gold of the
sunset is crowning the peaks with a fading burst of glory. Soon the
fights of the hotel will shine brightly forth into the gathering gloom,
and the dance music will strike up.

Each tells the others just what he would be doing at the moment were he
in the States, and comments. It is all done in an absolutely detached
manner, just as one describes incidents and chapters in books. We think
we would like to be home now, but we know that we would rather not. We
are perfectly contented to be doing what we are doing, and do not envy
those at home. Nor do we begrudge any of them the pleasant times they
may be having. In fact, if we thought they were giving them up we would
be miserable. One cannot think about this war for long at a time, and
when one meditates it is to speculate on what is happening at home. One
gloats over imaginary dances, theatres, and all varieties of good times.
I have often enjoyed monologue discussions with my friends, or imagined
myself doing any one of the many things I might have been doing. It is
the lonesome man’s chief standby to five by proxy.

Outside there is continually the dull thunder of the guns. They are
evidently firing _tir de barrage_, for there is a certain regularity in
the wave of sound that rumbles in on us. Perhaps the barrage is falling
on the roads behind the enemy lines, cutting off and destroying his
supply trains. Perhaps it is trying to sweep some of his batteries out
of existence, or perhaps it is falling on his trenches, taking its toll
of nerve and life. Again we can only conjecture. There is the continual
whine of his shells rushing overhead, and the _crump-crump_ of their
breaking in the near distance. Then the enemy starts a little sweeping
of his own, and the _arrivées_ begin to fall in an arc which draws
steadily nearer, until a thunder clap just outside and the rattling of
_éclats_, dirt, and tree fragments on the roof, make you rejoice in your
cover, and you chuckle as a _brancardier_ sleepily remarks, “_Entrez!_”
You wonder curiously, and listen expectantly to see if the next will
fall on you; then you doze again or say something to the man beside you.

Inside there is an equal variety of sounds. There are _poilus_ snoring
in seven different octaves, there is the splutter of the candle
overhead, and from one corner an occasional moan from some wounded man,
growing more frequent as the night wears on. We may not take him in
until we have enough for a load. Soon there is the sound of feet on the
stairs, and a _brancardier_ stumbles in leading a man raving wildly,
with his head swathed in fresh bandages rapidly staining with the oozing
blood. Some one moves, and he is seated and given a cup of _Pinard_ and
a cigarette, which he accepts gratefully. We get ready to go out to the
ambulance, but the doctor shakes his head—we have not a load yet. Some
of the regulations perplex us; but it is not our business, so we light
up our pipes again and snuggle down into our fur coats, dozing and
listening to the whine of the shells outside and the moans inside. Then,
after a while, another _blessé_ is brought to the door and the doctor
nods. Two of us jump up, snatch our _musettes_, run to the car, and
assist the _brancardiers_ in shoving in the third man, who is
unconscious. Then we crank up, and after some minutes of manœuvring in
the deep mud reach the road and start for the hospital.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE black of the night, split by the star-shells and the batteries, has
given place to the grey of the dawn. All is still and quiet, with the
rare crash of a battery or an _arrivée_ alone breaking the silence.
There is no sign of the sun, and it will be some hours before it breaks
through the early mist to smile upon us for a few brief moments before
the never-ending rain envelops us again,—for it is the _mauvais temps_.

After lying for two hours in one of the bunks in the _abri_, and vainly
endeavoring to keep warm with two _blessé_ blankets, I arise stiffly and
crawl out into the fresh air. The _blessé_ blankets are single blankets
quartered and, as they are assigned for use in the ambulances and
_abris_ for the wounded, often bring little visitors.


[Illustration: AN ABRI]


The air is clear and damp, and remarkably invigorating. A few deep
breaths start the blood slowly moving through my veins, and I walk
around in the mud, stretching my cramped limbs. There are the usual new
shell-holes scattered about to make us first rejoice in our shelter and
then look doubtfully at the all-too-thin layer of dirt on the roof
between us and a direct hit. The Germans, when they take up a position,
seem to think of it as permanent, dig their _abris_ often as deep as a
hundred feet underground, and are absolutely safe in them except when a
raiding party tosses a grenade down the stairs. Their officers’ quarters
are particularly spacious, lined with cement, with the walls often
papered, holding brass beds and other quite civilized comforts. A piano
was found in one. It had been put in before the cement was laid, and
they were unable to remove it when they retreated—even if they had had
the time. The French, whether from laziness or because they expect soon
again to be moving forward, waste little time on the dug-outs. The
standard is a pit lined with sandbags, and covered by a conventional
form of corrugated steel roof, with more sandbags and a little dirt on
top of this. These protect from the _éclats_, or shell fragments, but
form a death trap for all inside if there is a direct hit. If the side
of a hill or a hollow is available it affords more protection. The one
direct hit on our _abri_ at P 2 was luckily a “dud,” and caused no
damage.

I walk over to the pile of discarded equipment to see if anything
interesting has been added during the night. This and the hospital are
the two favorite places for souvenir hunters. At all the _postes_ and in
the hospitals the rifles, bayonets, packs, belts, cartridges, knives,
grenades, revolvers, shoes, and other equipment of the wounded and dead
are put in a large pile, and the first to recover get the pick—after our
selection. At the _postes_ these things are piled in the open, with no
protection from the elements, and many are slowly disintegrating. This
morning, of the new things there is of interest only one of the large
wire-clippers, used by the _pionniers_ and scouts for passing through
the enemy wire. But my friend has seen them first, so I waive all
claims, and he tucks them carefully away in one of the several
side-boxes with which the cars are equipped.

The trees are twice decimated, but the birds have stayed, and now they
are waking and, overflowing with high spirits, sing their message of
good cheer. They answer each other from different parts of the wood, and
by closing one’s eyes one seems to be in the country at home. Never has
the song of birds seemed more beautiful or more welcome, and, gladdened,
we listen while we may, before the slowly swelling thunder of the guns,
beginning their early morning bombardment, drowns out all other sound.
We go down again into the _abri_ and pray for a load soon to take us
down to the hospital and breakfast at headquarters.

                  *       *       *       *       *

WE have been ordered _en repos_, and after turning in our extra gas
masks—we carry ten in the car for the wounded in addition to the two on
our person—our _blessé_ blankets, and stretchers, we start in to load
the cars with our friends, and our own baggage. As for some time our
baggage has been lying _en masse_ in the “drawing-room” of Tucker Inn,
as some humorous _conducteur_ styled the roofless pen in Récicourt,
where our belongings were left while we were rolling, or in the
surrounding _abris_, one could not be at all certain that he was putting
the right things in the right duffles, and it was not surprising if a
stray jar or two of _confiture_ most unaccountably found its way into
one’s own duffle.

The section in formation, we roll off with the sun shining brightly on
grimy cars and drivers, down the roads, passing ruin after ruin, with a
burst of speed past a corner in view of the German trenches, and we
again begin to see familiar ground. The green hill back of Erize, with
shadows of the woods and the scars of the old trenches, appears in the
distance, and my friend looks at me and chuckles.

Back in the same little town, parked in the same ruins with the same
quietness, peace, and relaxation from the tenseness of the past days,
which is so welcome this time, my friend and I walk into a little
_estaminet_, pledge each other in glasses of French beer, and taking off
our helmets for almost the first time in what seems an age, survey them
and each other in placid contentment.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  III

                                EN REPOS


A BATCH of mail was given out the morning after our return. When we
moved, our address seemed to have been lost, for only a few letters, of
no interest to any one, managed to find us. We have been too busy to
miss them, and when they arrived in a bunch there were no complaints.

It is a wonderful thrill to get a letter from home, to read what those
who mean all to one are doing, and to feel their personalities throbbing
“between the lines.” We bridge for a brief moment the chasm of three
thousand miles, and in revery gaze upon those persons, those places, and
those things we have known. Our thoughts here are always in the past. We
cannot think of the present, and we dare not think of the future, but
there is always the past to live in,—the past of events and memories.

We settle down to the same dull monotony as before. For a few days this
is bliss, but it soon becomes tiring again. All work here is contrast.
When we are at work, we work intensively, taking less rest than seems
physically possible, and when _en repos_ we are plunged into the dullest
monotony imaginable, with nothing to amuse or occupy us. This is true of
every branch of active service.

The few air raids are rather an anticlimax after the days that have just
passed, especially as nothing falls near enough to cause us any
annoyance. At Bar-le-Duc the Boche playfully drops a dozen bombs into
the German prison camp, much to every one’s amusement; a mile from us he
destroys a camp of Bulgarian prisoners, and we wonder at his
hard-headedness and laugh. But the next night we hear bombs crashing in
the distance, and in the morning learn from some men in another section
passing through that it was Vadlaincourt, where the Huns flew so near
the ground that soldiers in the streets shot at them with rifles. At
that height the aeroplanes could not mistake their targets, and they
retired only when the hospital was a mass of flaming ruins. There are no
smiles at this. Another night the purring motors reveal outlined high
against the stars a fleet of Zeppelins, bound we know not where, but, we
do know, on a mission of death to the innocent.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE enemy aeroplane comes over us often. We have wondered why, but we
now realize that while the Allies can get control of the air when they
want it, to keep continual control would be too expensive in both men
and machines. The anti-aircraft gun theoretically solves the problem.
When an enemy machine appears, a battery of _contre-avions_ is notified
and essays the destruction of the adventurer.

It is pretty sport. A little white machine, sometimes catching the glint
of the sun, dashes towards us at a great height. It is sighted, and then
the high-pitched boom-booms of the _contre-avions_ start in, and the
shrapnel breaks at varying distances around the machine like
powder-puffs, which float along for some minutes. After a little of this
harmless sport the Boche gets out of range, the guns cease, and the
machine, having in the meanwhile disposed of some bombs or taken some
photographs, dashes off, to be followed shortly by one or two Frenchmen.

The practical value of the anti-aircraft guns is to keep the machines so
high in the air that they can accomplish little, as the guns rarely
score. At M——, where every day they have been shooting two or three
hundred rounds at the machines which fly over the city, they are quite
proud of their record, for once in one day they shot down three
machines—two of their own and one German. They have been resting on
their laurels ever since. It was a few examples like this which taught
the French airmen to keep out of the sky while the _contre-avions_ were
busy.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“NAPOLEON” was so christened by us because, despite his sparrow-like
form and manner, he considers himself the moving spirit of the army in
general and of our section in particular. Because he knows nothing about
automobiles, he styles himself an expert,—the mere fact that he is
assigned as clerk to an ambulance section proves his claim. The one time
he had the indiscretion to touch a car, he drove the lieutenant’s around
the compound with the emergency brake set—after telling the _sous-chef_
that he had driven cars for twenty years! One of the ambulances goes for
_ravitaillement_ every day, carrying “Napoleon,” who disappears into
mysterious buildings and returns with still more mysterious edibles,
presumably for our delectation.

On one trip the carburetor gave trouble and we stopped and cleaned it.
While we were working we noticed “Napoleon” industriously turning the
lights on and off, pumping the button on the dash. We said nothing, and
when we had finished and started the car again he tapped his chest
proudly, cocked his head, and said, “_Moi!_”

In circumnavigating a large team in the centre of the road later that
day I rubbed “Napoleon” off against a horse, and after that he snubbed
me on every occasion.

                  *       *       *       *       *

BEING at the cross-roads, all manner of men and things come through
Erize. The never-ending stream of _camions_ passing each other as they
go, layers deep with dust and grime, winds on steadily. There is great
rivalry between the _camion pelotons_, and each has adopted an insignia
painted on the sides of the cars to distinguish it from the others. As
there are several hundred _pelotons_ the designs are many, interesting,
and reveal much of the inner nature of the _poilu_. Every species of
beast and fowl is depicted,—greyhound, stork, swallow, and other
types,—as a monkey riding on a shell, a demon with trident pursuing a
German, and then perhaps a child’s face, copied no doubt from the locket
of one of the men.

Soldiers go up cheering wildly, singing and shouting. They return
silent, tired, covered with mud, and reduced in numbers. German rifles,
bayonets, caps, buttons, cartridges, and other odds and ends are then
offered for sale. In August a _poilu_ offered me a German rifle. I was
examining it, and admiring the design, when I noticed the maker’s
name,—the latest type German rifle had been made in New Jersey, U.S.A.

In addition to these things, the _poilus_ have for sale many articles
they have made themselves. The favorite is the _briquet_, or pocket
lighter. This is made in all conceivable sizes and shapes, and operates
by a flint and steel lighting a gasoline wick. This is why we use more
gasoline _en repos_ than when rolling! The soldiers also take the
_soixante-quinze_ shell-cases and carve and hammer them into vases. As
many of the men were experts at work of this type “_avant la guerre_,”
and as much local talent has appeared since, some of the specimens are
very fine indeed, and command high prices in the cities.


[Illustration: A DIVISION EN REPOS
INTERNATIONAL FILM SERVICE CO., INC.]


It is these laughing, playing, seemingly care-free soldiers who are the
spirit of the war. Relieved from the tense struggle of life and death
for a brief rest, their joyous nature blossoms forth in reaction from
the serious affairs of their day’s work.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THERE is nothing that so brings out the best in a man as to fight
against terrific odds, to struggle in a losing fight with the knowledge
that only by superhuman effort can the odds be equaled or turned. To
work for an ideal is a wonderfully inspiring thing, but when the battle
necessitates the risking or the sacrificing of home, happiness, and life
it brings to the surface in those who persevere characteristics which
lie dormant or concealed.

An ideal must be worth while when millions of men gladly risk their all
for its attainment, and those men who risk and sacrifice must have
returned to them something for what they give. Whatever sort of creature
he is on the surface, the fire test, if a man passes it and is not
shrivelled in its all-consuming flame, must develop in him certain
latent and hitherto buried attributes which are fit to greet the light
of day. If he be lacking in worthy human instincts, the flame will
destroy him, but if he passes through the test, he emerges a better
man—how much better depends on the individual. At least, having once
seen the ideal, he has something now for which to live and strive.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE world, judging from what it saw on the surface, flatly declared that
France could never stand up under the strain; but what has happened has
proved how little of the real worth of a nation or of a man is ever
visible on the surface. There must always come the test, the fire which
burns off the mask, the false surface beneath which mankind ever hides,
and brings forth what is concealed—good or bad. The bad is swept away
and the good survives.

The French are a temperamental people, and consequently are most easily
affected by circumstances. In former times the mass of the people were
inclined to be demonstrative, insincere, somewhat selfish, and rather
egotistical. These characteristics could never pass the tests, and now
the true spirit of France, the Phœnix, is rising from the ashes of the
past a freed and glorified being, radiant in the joy of accomplishment.
From the torture she has endured, an understanding of the feelings and
desires of others must be born which will banish the taint of
selfishness forever. Those who do things are never egotistical—they have
no time to talk, and France has been doing things these past years.
Those who rub elbows with the elementals and sacrifice for each other
and a cause can never be insincere again. And what harm is there in
demonstration? The bad characteristics removed, this becomes merely an
effervescence, a bubbling over of a joyous, unrestrained nature—Ponce de
Leon’s true fountain of perpetual youth.

The difference between the men who have served at the front and either
seen or felt great suffering, and those who have not, is most marked.
One evening I was in an _abri_ where some new recruits were wrangling
over unimportant things, and showing their selfish character in every
speech and act, when a desperately wounded man was brought in. After
serving for some time in the trenches he had been given a few days’
leave to see his family. He went back happily, thinking of the wife and
the little children he was soon to see again. Having left the third-line
trenches, he was walking through the woods down the _boyau_ which leads
to the outer world, when a shell broke overhead. The _brancardiers_
patched him up and brought him in with his head bound so that his eyes
and mouth alone were visible. The doctor handed him a cup of _Pinard_
and a cigarette, neither of which would he touch until he had offered it
to the rest of us. I picked up his helmet which he had put down for an
instant, although his eye never left it. There was a hole in it through
which I could have rolled a golf ball.

To illustrate the reverse—I was standing in a town a little ways back,
waiting for a car to give me a lift up to the lines, when a kitten
rubbed against my leg. I picked it up and started to play with it.
Instantly a peasant—not too old to serve—rushed out and snatched the
kitten from my arms:

“_Ce nest pas à vous!_” was his comment.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE English can never be called a temperamental race, but even their
stolid worth has needed much shaking up for the best in it to come to
the surface. The example they have set since their awakening is one
which any nation may well emulate, and it will be a proud people indeed
which can ever equal the record they have made in this war for courage
and devotion, never surpassed in the history of the world.

The _poilu_ and the Tommy are of such opposite types that each
completely mystifies the other. The Frenchman works himself up to a
fanatical state of enthusiasm, and in a wild burst of excitement dashes
into the fray. The Englishman finishes his cigarette, exchanges a joke
with his “bunkie,” and coolly goes “over the top.” Both are wonderful
fighters, with the profoundest admiration for each other, but each with
an absolute lack of understanding of the other, intensified by the
difference in language.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE varying characteristics of troops from different parts of the
world—the allied countries, dependencies, and colonies—have led to their
classification and assignment to the work best adapted to their
temperament. The fighting troops are divided into two main classes
called the “flying” and the “holding” divisions. There are some troops
who are wonderful in a charge, but have no stamina or staying power to
resist counterattacks or the wear of steady fighting. There are others
who lack the initiative and dash, but who can hold on and resist
anything. Then there are others who, while they are possessed of both
qualities, are somewhat better suited for one class than the other. The
Flying Divisions are used chiefly in the attacks, where a quick advance
and desperate fighting must win the day. This completed, they go back
_en repos_ again, while the Holding Divisions take their place to
consolidate the ground won, and to resist the enemy’s attempts to regain
it. The Flying Divisions have longer _repos_ but more violent fighting
while they are on the line, and the Holding Divisions have shorter
_repos_ but a less strenuous although longer stretch in the trenches.
This has all been worked out from observation and experiment.

For example,—in the early days of the war the Madagascans, French
colored colonial troops, are given certain trenches to take. They take
them with little delay, and are told to consolidate and hold them. This
is all very well until supper fails to arrive. The soldiers wait
impatiently for a short while, and then, ignoring the commands of their
officers, evacuate their trenches, which are immediately occupied by the
Germans, and go back for their meal. Supper finished, with no hesitation
they return and in a wild charge recapture their trenches and several
more.

Other French troops in the Flying Division are the Algerians, who have
done wonderful fighting throughout the war, and have suffered heavily.
It is the boast of the Foreign Legion, which is classed as Algerian,
that since its organization it has never failed to reach its objective,
and even in this war it has made good its boast. In one attack the
Legion entered thirty-five thousand strong and returned victorious with
a remnant of thirty-five hundred men.

The Algerians have a sense of humor all their own. An _ambulancier_ was
carrying one of them down to the hospital. As he was only slightly
wounded he was sitting on the front seat with the driver, leaving more
room for the _couchés_ inside. One of the _couchés_ was a German. Half
way to the _triage_ the Algerian made signs to the driver to stop. The
driver looked inquiringly at the man who, with a broad grin, pulled out
a long knife and pointed at the German. The driver naturally did not
humor him, and the sulky Zouave refused to speak to him during the rest
of the trip.

Another Algerian came into the _poste_ one day. He had a great joke that
he wanted us all to hear. He said that he had been given three prisoners
to bring in, and was leading them down a road in a pouring rain, when he
noticed the ruin of a house with the roof missing. He told the prisoners
to go in there there—“where it would be drier,” and when they complied,
stood on the outside and tossed grenades over the wall at them.

The fact that the colonial troops of the Allies, especially those of
Great Britain—the Canadians, Australians, and New Zealanders—fall
practically without exception into the Flying Division because of the
initiative, dash, and daring developed in them to such a degree, has
given Germany, who has won more victories with poisoned pen than with
the sword, an opportunity to stir up hard feeling with her propaganda
between the colonies and their mother country.

This propaganda claims that England has sacrificed her Colonials to save
her own troops. Nothing could be farther from the truth. While the
Colonials are in the Flying Division and the larger part of the English
in the Holding Division, because of their famous bulldog tenacity, the
English have lost a greater percentage of their men than any one of the
colonies. The world has never seen such fighting as the troops of Great
Britain have had to stand up under, and full credit is always given the
Colonials for their share.

The Canadians particularly have distinguished themselves. They share
with the Foreign Legion alone the distinction of never having been given
an objective they have not taken. When the order came for the attack on
Vimy Ridge it read: _The Canadians will take Vimy Ridge at such and such
an hour_, and they took it on the dot. With the Canadians must be put
the Anzacs,—Australians and New Zealanders,—examples of what universal
military training can do.

Then there are the Indians, who never take a prisoner. By training and
tradition they are great head-hunters, and enjoy nothing better than
creeping out at night over No Man’s Land and waiting before the enemy’s
trench until a sentry puts up his head to observe. A quick sweep of the
curved knife, the head is secured, and the Indian returns with the
feeling of “something accomplished, something done, has earned a night’s
repose.” Their sense of humor has much in common with that of the
Algerians—and of the Germans.

Many of the heads, in all stages of curing, have been found in the
knapsacks and equipments of these troops—when they were dead or
unconscious. While conscious, the Indian will guard them with his life,
feeling that they are legitimate souvenirs.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THERE are three French medals which are given for service in this war,
not to mention a number of lesser ones which are seen rarely. The most
coveted of these is the Legion of Honour, a medal famous for some
centuries both in war and peace. This is divided into several classes.
There is the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour, a very large medal
worn over the right-hand pocket with no ribbon. This has been awarded to
a few men of the greatness of Joffre and Petain. Then there is the grade
of Commander of the Legion of Honour. This is a smaller cross worn at
the neck. There are also the ranks of Officer and Chevalier. Both are
small crosses on red ribbons, but the former has a rosette on the ribbon
to distinguish it. These are awarded to officers only and are greatly
prized.

Two new medals were struck for the war,—the _Médaille Militaire_ and the
_Croix de Guerre_. The _Médaille_ is a round medal on a yellow ribbon of
one class only, and is awarded to officers and soldiers alike for actual
bravery on the field. The _Croix de Guerre_ is a bronze cross on a green
and red ribbon, and has three classes,—the _Croix de Guerre d’Armée_,
which has a bronze palm on the ribbon, _de Corps d’Armée_, which has a
bronze star on the ribbon, and _de Division_, which has a plain ribbon.
They are awarded for different degrees of bravery or service to officers
and soldiers alike, and may be won unlimited times. In aviation a
_Croix_ with palm is given to an aviator for every enemy plane he is
officially credited with downing. Thus Gynemer at the time of his death
was privileged to wear fifty-five palms on his ribbon. For the benefit
of such as he a silver palm is worn, representing five bronze, and a
gold palm in place of ten bronze. Before this was allowed, Gynemer wore
his ribbon with forty odd palms.

In addition to these there are the colonial medals and a number of
French decorations which have not strictly to do with the war.

                  *       *       *       *       *

TONIGHT I am on guard. I have just taken a walk around the cars. It is
the hour before the dawn, and the cold, grey mist hangs over all, robing
the jagged ruins and harmonizing the rough outlines into something more
human, while accentuating the stare of the vacant window-openings. There
is the first crescent of the moon in the sky. Two companies of artillery
have just passed along the road. The guns and caissons creak and rumble,
and the men, preserving a sleepy silence, bend forward on their horses,
their heavy sabres smacking against the horses’ sides, and their blue
uniforms melting into the mist.

The officer halts to water his horse, and we chat for a minute. The
_contre-avions_ are after a raider headed for Bar-le-Duc, and I put out
my lantern. We smile as the shrapnel bursts more than a mile from the
machine. The officer speaks a few words of praise about his men, then
vaults on his horse. We exchange “_bonne chance_” and he canters off
down the road, disappearing in the blue-grey mist.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A RUMOR creeps into camp that the next attack will be at V——. More
rumors follow, supported by the increased traffic. We are on the main
road to V——, and are keenly critical. We take out our maps and examine
the outline of the front in the sector just as if we knew something
about it. Would-be strategists hold forth in heated arguments, and many
bitter debates follow. Those of us who have the early watch just at
daybreak notice many companies of _soixante-quinzes_ rumbling by each
morning, and observe that they take the left fork of the road. This is
important, for the left road leads towards M——, which is really not in
our sector. More argument follows, and ears are constantly strained to
catch the first augmentation of the distant thunder of the guns, and to
determine from which end of the sector it comes.

Now all the officers admit that an attack is to ensue shortly, but they
do not know when. We tune up our cars and get our baggage ready, as we
may be called. The lieutenant receives some orders and warns us to be
ready to move on a moment’s notice.

The traffic is incessant now. _Camions_ with shells, barbed wire,
_camouflage_ cloth, _torpilles_, and more shells rush by. Convoys pass
filled with troops, cheering wildly, thirty-five hundred or more in an
evening. The thunder is gradually intensified, and the sky flashes
faintly in the distance like heat lightning. From a hilltop artillery
rockets and star-shells can be seen in the far horizon. More troops keep
going up, and the guns pound the line with unabated fury.

It is evening, and we are formed in a circle listening to some story.
The lieutenant walks up to us:

“We move at seven in the morning,” he says laconically, and steps off.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   IV

                              AT THE FRONT

THIS time we have a different run. It is from Montzéville to Hill 239,
and the wounded are brought in through the communication trench which
leads to Mort Homme—the well-named Dead Man’s Hill. The road was once
lined for a distance of perhaps a mile with towering poplars, evinced by
the size of the stumps, but now not one of them is left higher than
three or four feet. The road runs the entire distance across open
meadows, and as what _camouflage_ there was has been shot away by the
Boche in his search for two 220 batteries, which have long since moved
on, the enemy _saucisses_ can regulate the traffic quite simply. The
place has been shot up so much recently that there has been no time to
repair the roads fully, and now there are long stretches temporarily
patched with rough, broken stone, which makes bad going. Riding forward,
one sees large German shells breaking on the road ahead like sudden
black clouds, which disappear slowly and convey to the mind
uncomfortable premonitions.

Mort Homme comes suddenly and bleakly into view about two kilometres on
our left,—a hill, not exceedingly high, commanding a great plain, it is
imposing only in the memory of the rivers of blood that have flowed down
its sides. Once—and looking at it one can scarcely believe it—this was
covered with trees and vegetation like many another less famous hill.
Now it is reduced to a mere sandpile, pitted with the scars of a million
shells. After standing the continuous bombardment of both combatants for
over a year, there is left not a stick of vegetation, nor an inch of
ground that has not been turned over by shells many times. Crowned by
the pink of the sunset, it stands there on the plain a great monument to
the glorious death of thousands.

The French lost many thousands of lives in their attempts to capture
Mort Homme, and were very bitter, consequently, against its defenders.
There was a large tunnel running through the hill, and when three sides
had been captured and both ends of the tunnel were held, it was
discovered that they had trapped there three thousand Germans. I talked
with a man who walked through the tunnel the day after the massacre and
he told me that it was literally inches deep in blood.

Arrived at the _poste_, which is nothing more than a hole in the ground,
we stand around while the _brancardiers_ load the car and exchange lies
with any one who happens to be there. The Boche sends a dozen or more
shells whining over our heads to break on the road or beside it, and
near enough for every one to gravitate slowly towards the _abri_ in
preparation for a wild dive should the next shell fall much nearer. One
man asked me why they put stairs leading into an _abri_, as nobody ever
thought of using them. When I asked him how else one would get out, he
said he had never thought of that.

There is nothing quite so uncomfortable to hear as the near whistle of a
shell. The more one hears the sound the more it affects him. There is
something in the sharp whine which seems to create despair and induce
subconscious melancholy. There is a feeling of helplessness and
powerlessness that is most depressing. The thunder of the guns or the
crash of the bursting shells cannot be compared with the sound of this
approaching menace. It is as if some demon from the depths of Hades were
hurtling towards you, its weird laughter crying out, calling to you and
chilling your blood. For the second of its passage a hush falls on the
conversation, and the best jokes die in dry throats. But it is only for
that second, and instantly laughter rings out again at some jest.
Speculations or comments are made on the probable or observed place
where it exploded, and all is the same except for that subconscious
tenseness which, for the most part unrealized, grips every man while he
goes about his work here.

The first ordeal by fire is the easiest. It is then but a new and
interesting sensation and experience. Later, after one has seen the
effect and had some close calls, it is more of a nervous strain. The
whine of a shell is very high-pitched, and after a time the sound wears
distinctly on the nerves. It is a curious fact that, in spite of the
philosophy developed, the longer a man has been under shell-fire the
harder it is for him to stand it. By no means would he think of showing
it, but he would not deny the fact. It is only the philosophy and
callousness developed which keep the men from breaking down, and in many
cases the strain on the nerves becomes so great that men do collapse
under it. This is one of the forms of so-called “shell-shock.”

The car loaded with _blessés_, we start back, driving more slowly this
time, as precious lives are in our care and jolts must be avoided
wherever possible. We find the road still more “out of repair” than when
we went over it before, with a number of new shell-holes varying from
two to ten feet in diameter, and much wood, dirt, and torn _camouflage_
strewn about, and often a horse lying where it was hit, its blood
coloring the mud in the gutter.

Approaching the town of Montzéville one sees at first a
wood—_ci-devant_—now a few blackened tree-trunks of spectre-like
appearance against the grey of the evening sky. Behind these appears the
town, a mass of jagged ruins, at that distance seeming to be absolutely
deserted. In fact it is, except for the dozen odd men who live in two or
three scattered _abris_ for some obscure purpose. An air of desolation
and despair broods over the place, and God knows it has seen enough to
haunt it.

From Montzéville we ride on to Dombasle and Jouy, the hospital, and
after handing over our more or less helpless charges to the tender
mercies of the _brancardiers_, we return to the relay station at
Montzéville to wait for our next roll, and to wonder what possible good
those _poilus_ can be doing who sit all day so peacefully at the door of
the _abri_ opposite ours, sipping _Pinard_ and smoking their cigarettes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE soldiers at the front are always looking for the bright side of
life, and after a little one gets to see humor in many more things than
he would have believed possible at home. As an example, there seems to
be little humor connected with a funeral, yet one of the times I saw the
_poilus_ most amused was one day at P 4, our relay station, on such an
occasion.

There had been an intermittent bombardment, and we were sitting or
standing inside the _abri_ waiting for it to let up. The _abri_ was
located in the corner of a graveyard, and there was always the
unpleasant feeling that the next rain might wash a few bones in on us.
The _abri_ was small, very crowded, and, as it was several feet
underground, none too well ventilated. Every one spent long stretches
here, and brought his food with him. What was too poor to eat soon mixed
with the mud on the floor, lending an unsavory odor to the atmosphere.
Presently one of the Frenchmen went out to see if the bombardment had
stopped. This is discovered by the same method one ascertains whether or
not it is raining—if he gets wet the storm is not over. The bombardment
was not over, and we waited. At last it seemed to have let up, only an
occasional shell crashing into the woods across the road, and we went
out to stretch and get a breath of air.

The _poilus_ gathered our inquisitive friend from the surrounding
shrubbery and trees and put him into several empty sandbags which they
laid on a stretcher, carefully placing the head, which appeared to have
been solid enough to withstand the shock, at the upper end. Another man
carried a freshly-made pine-wood coffin. In high spirits, the assembled
soldiers formed a procession and marched into the graveyard, singing
alternately a funeral dirge and “Madelon,” the French “Tipperary.” This
graveyard, not being on the firing-line itself, was rather a formal
affair. The graves were laid out in neat rows, and each man had one all
to himself with a wooden cross and his name on it. Of course
occasionally the shells did a little mixing, but that was a jest of the
Fates which disturbed no one, least of all those who were mixed.

Arrived at the grave, the _poilus_ rolled in the fragments of our late
friend and covered them with dirt.

              “_Not a drum was heard, not a funeral note._”

Then they came back, roaring with laughter and tossing the coffin in the
air. The hero had expected the coffin and they had fooled him. Now they
could use it again.

The usual method of burial on the French front, where there is little
time to attend to such matters, is to dig a ditch six feet wide, ten
feet deep, and twenty feet long approximately. As each man is killed,
time and circumstances permitting, he is divested of his coat and shoes,
and his pockets are emptied. He is then thrown into the ditch and
covered with a few shovelfuls of dirt. This system is all very well
until new divisions relieve those in the trenches, and start digging
ditches for their own men. As there are no marks to show the location of
the old ones, they sometimes uncover rather unpleasant sights.

The reputation we have gained at home of being cold-blooded and lacking
in the finer senses is undeserved. While one is in it he cannot permit
himself to realize or dwell on the horrors or they would overwhelm him
and drive him insane. What is more natural than for the reaction to turn
the matter into jest and joke, to permit it to glance from the surface
without inflicting a wound?—“_C’est la guerre._”

                  *       *       *       *       *

PLUNGED suddenly from the commonplaces of peace into the seething
cauldron of war, France has had to adjust herself. Every one without
exception has lost many who were dear to him and much that he had
considered essential. The homes and hopes of thousands have been
blasted. Destruction, following in the wake of the invaders, has laid
waste much of the land, in many cases irreparably.

Entering the war a man is possessed of the greatest seriousness. He
thinks of its causes, the results both immediate and future, and of the
effect of each on him. He is stunned by what he believes himself to be
bearing up under. Then, as he moves up into the zone, into service and
action, and sees how others are affected, how much suffering and
misfortune come to them, he merges his troubles with theirs, realizing
the pettiness and insignificance of his own in the _tout ensemble_. He
laughs, and from this laugh springs the philosophy,—“_C’est la guerre._”

If a fly falls in his soup, if his best friend is blown to bits before
him, if his home and village are destroyed, he calmly shrugs his
shoulders, and remarks, “_C’est la guerre._”

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE roads at the front are cared for by a class of unsung heroes, the
roadbuilders. Back of the lines German prisoners are often used for this
work, but it is a rule of warfare that prisoners must not be worked
under fire, and the Allies observe this as the other rules of civilized
warfare. The roads are the arteries of the front, and during an attack
the enemy does his best to cripple them. If he succeeds, the troops in
the trenches, cut off from food, ammunition, and other supplies, are at
his mercy. During one attack through which I worked, the Boche, whose
hobby is getting ranges down to the inch and applying them as all other
things in a definite system, put a 150 every ten yards down the more
important roads.


[Illustration: NORMAL TRAFFIC AT THE FRONT
INTERNATIONAL FILM SERVICE CO., INC.]


All work in the zone is done by three classes of workers, excluding the
necessary military operations carried on by the troops in action. First,
there are the German prisoners who do every kind of work out of the zone
of fire. Then there are the French prisoners in the army, who have
committed some military crime, from sneezing in ranks to shooting a
colonel. Instead of serving time in a guardhouse, these are put in the
front-line trenches and kept there unarmed to build up the parapet,
attend to the drains, stop Boche bullets, and perform other functions.
If, for instance, a French soldier sends a letter through the civil
instead of the military mails, where the censorship is more strict, he
receives a thirty days’ sentence. If these prisoners make a suspicious
move they are shot by their own men. Second timers are rare, but many
serve life sentences.

Then there is the third class, a regular branch of the army, a
subdivision of the engineers, termed _pionniers_. The engineers do the
nastiest work in the army, and the _pionniers_ do the nastiest work in
the engineers. It is their duty to see that the wire is properly cut
before a charge, that the parapet is in repair and does not lack
sandbags,—and it is in this class that the roadbuilders come.

All along the roads lie piles of broken stone, which are continually
replaced by loads from the rear. At intervals are placed _abris_ filled
with roadbuilders who watch until a shell hits the road in their sector.
Then, almost before the dirt settles, they rush out armed with shovels,
and pile this rough stone into the hole and rush back again to shelter,
to wait for the next shell, which is not long in coming. This rough
patching is consolidated later when the sector quiets down, but does
admirably for the time-being, as the mud and traffic push it rapidly
into shape.

Steam-rollers are then sent up to finish the work, but find themselves
_persona non grata_ when left over night in the middle of a narrow and
muddy road, with no lights showing. We _ambulanciers_ are not fond of
the species at any time, as they seem to have a great affinity for
six-inch shells. When disintegrated, any one of the numerous parts
blocks our way. We are perfectly content to have the task left to the
simple roadbuilder, who proves less of an obstruction after meeting a
one-fifty.

                  *       *       *       *       *

MANY undeveloped instincts lie dormant in the subconscious mind of man.
In this war, where man has turned back the pages of civilization to live
and act for a period of time as a glorified cave-dweller, a number of
these unknown faculties have been discovered and developed.

Many animals have the power of seeing in the dark, and all species can
sense an unknown danger. These senses have been denied to civilized man,
but the primitive life at the front has developed them and other
instincts in those who live there so that it seems as if man might again
become possessed of all his latent powers.

A man going along a road has a conviction that if he continues he will
be killed. He makes a wide detour to avoid the road, and a shell strikes
where he would have been. Then again, men have premonitions that they
will be killed in the next attack or battle. All this is coupled with
absolute fatalism. They feel either that they are going to be killed or
will live through everything, and whichever it is, they merely shrug
their shoulders, remark, “_C’est la guerre_,” and permit nothing to
alter their belief. Many say that the shell with their name on it has
not yet been made, or if it has—“Why worry? We cannot escape it.” I
carried one man, while doing evacuation work, who had served three years
without a scratch, and when _en repos_ had fallen from an apple tree and
broken his leg. He thought it a great joke.

The _ambulancier_ has developed two of these instincts to quite a
degree. The first is that he can always locate an _abri_, his or some
one else’s, and disappear in it with astounding rapidity. The second is
that he can keep the road with no lights. This has to be done almost
entirely by instinct on many nights, and we find it usually safer to
make a turn where the “inner voice” directs us rather than where we
remember it should be. It is not remarkable, of course, that an
occasional car falls into a ditch or a shell-hole, but astonishing
rather how seldom this happens. While our Fords never attained any great
speed in night driving, I rode once with a friend from another section
in a Fiat, when he drove in pitch darkness faster than fifty miles an
hour, taking every turn accurately and safely by instinct and luck.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE mud plays havoc with calculations, and we long to set our foot once
again on dry land. All the water in France seems to have gone into mud.
Water has never been a popular beverage here, and now it is even less
so. One horrified _poilu_, who had observed me drinking a glass of
water, asked if it did not give me indigestion. At the front there is
good reason for this. With so many men buried in the ground and so many
animals uninterred on it, all the springs are contaminated, and the
germs of every disease lurk in the water.

The French army provides a light red wine to take its place. This wine
is little stronger than grape juice and is the _Pinard_ of the _poilus_.
The government also provides tobacco which, to quote one _ambulancier_,
cannot be smoked without a gas mask.

The water in the streams is little better, and a bath in one of them
gives more moral than physical satisfaction. One French artilleryman
told me with great glee of seeing from his observation post a company of
German soldiers marched down to a river for a bath. As soon as they were
in the water he signalled the range to his battery, and they put a
barrage between the bathers and their clothes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

VERDUN is more than a name now—it is a symbol. France’s glorious fight
here with her back to the wall has gone down in history as a golden
page. The foe thundered at the gates and the gates held,—held for months
while the fate of France hung in the balance, and then opening, the
hosts of France poured out and drove the foe back mile by mile, bitter
miles.

The city does not boast an unscarred building, but these wounds do not
bleed in vain. For every one here there shall be two across the frontier
when the day of reckoning comes. An awe-inspiring silence broods over
the littered streets. There are no civilians here now, but many
soldiers, and as one walks an occasional cheer greets him,—“_Vive
l’Amérique!_”

The enemy has been driven back so far by this time that not more than
half a dozen vengeful shells a day are directed towards the violated
cathedral, its subterranean vaults blown open and exposed, its walls
struck, its windows shattered, and its roof fallen. A walk through this
city, divided by the peaceful Meuse, would convince one, if nothing had
before, that this war is not in vain, and that no force should be
spared, no rest taken until the nation which has perpetrated these
million crimes be crushed, that it may never strike like this again.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A BATTLE is made up of a number of attacks, and a push consists of a
number of battles. Consequently, each attack is most important as it is
one of the single stones out of which the wall of the push is
constructed. The taking of A—— was a small attack in itself, but it was
a part of the foundation on which was built the great August push at
Verdun.

Our section rolled into a town about four miles from A—— three days
before the attack proper was scheduled to begin. We established our
headquarters there, and our relay station and _poste de secours_ in the
Hesse Forest, the latter just behind the third-line trenches.

In the Champagne push the year before the French had not had nearly
enough artillery support, and it had cost them many lives. It is
something one hears spoken of rarely. To avoid a repetition of this
disaster they had massed for this attack in one wood six thousand guns
varying in calibre from the famous 75’s to several batteries of 380’s,
mounted on a railroad a stone’s throw from our sleeping quarters.
However, as we had no time for sleep, it made little difference. The 75
is about a three-inch gun, and the 380, a sixteen approximately.

Starting in three days before the attack, these guns began firing as
steadily as they could without overheating. Very often in our front
_abri_ it was impossible to write because of the vibration. One day,
when we stopped in the woods to change a punctured tire, the car was
knocked off the jack by the shocks several times before we could remove
the tire, and at last we had to run in on the rim.

Finally, just before the men were to go over the top, the barrage was
set down in front of the trenches and the men climbed over the parapet,
and started walking towards the enemy. It is always possible to tell the
_tir de barrage_ by the sound of the guns. There is a certain regularity
which is lacking when each gun is firing at independent targets, and the
steady thunder gives one the feeling of a tremendous hammer smashing,
smashing, irresistibly, each blow falling true and hard, and following
one another with the regularity of the machines in a giant factory.

A perfect barrage is impenetrable, with the shells falling so near
together and with such short intervals of time between that nothing can
survive it. The only possibility is the inaccuracy of some one or more
guns which will put a number of shells out of the line and leave a break
or opening.

Before the attack the officers all have their watches carefully
synchronized, as a mistake of one minute may cost many lives. Walking
ahead of their men, keeping them the right distance behind the solid
wall of flame and steel, they wait until a certain minute when the
barrage is lifted a number of yards and then advance to that distance.
In the orders, the minute the barrage is to be lifted and the distance
are given out beforehand; for to advance the soldiers too quickly would
be to put them under fire from their own guns.

In this attack the first wave passed over the destroyed wire, and on
reaching the enemy’s front-line trenches could not distinguish them from
the rest of the ground, and found no living thing there. The second-line
trenches were little better, and they got their fighting at the
third-line trenches. So perfect had the preparation and execution of
this attack been that the Bois d’A—— was cleared of the enemy in
thirteen minutes from the time the French left their trenches.

The first wave is followed by the “butchers” (the English “moppers-up”),
who kill all the wounded and the odd prisoners, it being impractical for
a charging line to attempt to hold a few captives. Also another factor
which makes this treatment of prisoners necessary, and which the Allies
have learned by experience, is that unguarded men, once the first wave
has passed over them, will take out a machine gun and catch the
advancing troops between two fires. This happened a number of times
before the simple expedient was adopted of requesting the prisoners to
go down into an _abri_ where they would be “safer,” and then tossing in
two or three grenades which kill and bury them at the same time.

Of course the Boche was not idle in the meanwhile, and kept up a hail of
fire from behind A—— Wood and Dead Man’s Hill, which did not fall until
two days later, and we had the benefit of this back on the roads as we
tore from the relay station to the _poste_, to the hospital, and back
again, trying to take care of as many as we could of the countless
wounded from the attack who were being brought in. French soldiers who
had been in the war since 1914 said that they had never seen such fire.

This run and the work through this attack were the most interesting of
the experiences I had in the zone. We worked day and night, sleeping and
eating at odd moments and with long intervals between, ceasing only when
twelve of our cars had gone _en panne_, and half that number of drivers
were in the hospital suffering from the new mustard gas which was
showered on us in gas shells. We were tired indeed when relieved for a
short period _en repos_.


[Illustration: TAKING A LOAD FROM THE ABRI
COPYRIGHT—INTERNATIONAL FILM SERVICE CO., INC.]


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   V

                                L’ENVOI


AN American army is in France. Old Glory is proudly floating above an
armed host which has come to stand shoulder to shoulder with the Allies,
and do battle to prove that Right makes Might. We read in the papers of
the ovations the troops receive, of the reviews, the presentations, the
compliments, and the training, and our hearts beat proudly because we
too are Americans. We are non-combatants, to be sure, and are members
not of the American army but of the French; yet, we are serving in the
same cause, and, we hope, doing our bit towards the final victory.

We know that sooner or later the entire American Field Service is to be
absorbed by the American army, but as to when this is to come, and in
what manner, we are ignorant. We debate often now about these things,
and wonder what effect the change is to have on us and on the section.
Pessimist has picked up a rumor somewhere that we are to be turned out
in a body, and that drivers who have been training at Allentown are to
take our places. Cheerful Liar informs us that we are all to be made
first lieutenants, and that the section is to serve with the American
troops. “Napoleon” thinks that we are to be discharged, and that French
drivers who “know their business” are to take our places. Some one else
says that we are all to be put in the trenches. No one knows anything
definite, and the _chef_ and _sous-chefs_ are besieged for information
which they have not. The Assistant Inspector comes out to us and we know
little more. American officers encountered in Bar-le-Duc can give us no
information, and rumors, most of them originating in the section,
contradict each other.

One evening a large Pierce Arrow pulls up beside our cars, parked in a
walnut grove. Three American medical officers step out with clanking
spurs, and we are all attention. The _chef_ is called and we assemble.
The officer in command makes a short speech. The section is to be taken
over, he says, and those who remain must enlist as privates in the
American army for the duration of the war. These men, having signed up,
are then at the disposal of the Army, but will probably be kept in the
Ambulance Service. The new officers are to be an American lieutenant,
who will be our present _chef_, two sergeants, and a corporal. The
section is to continue to serve with the French army, but may be
transferred to the new American front.

We form small circles and discuss the situation. All the freedom and
romance are gone, but many are going to stay. The rest have chosen
aviation or artillery, and one or two may return home. The old volunteer
Ambulance Service is dead, but the days we have lived with it are
golden, and nothing can ever take them away from us, or bring them back
again.

There is a little lump in each man’s throat as he turns in tonight, but
from now on we serve America, and any sacrifice is worth that. And for
the rest—“_C’est la guerre._”

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE participation of the United States in this war marks the time of
this country’s coming of age, and the real beginning of its work as one
of the great world powers. Up to the War of the Revolution the thirteen
colonies had more than enough on their hands in managing their own
affairs. In the throes of that war the country was born, and slowly
grew, feeling its increasing power which was never quite secure until
the Civil War was at an end. Then, year by year, reaching out over the
two continents of America, guiding and helping our weaker brothers in
their affairs, gave us a foundation of courage and experience in the
adolescent period before we were ready to stand forth staunch in our
beliefs and secure in our power to uphold them. That that time has come,
and that the Old World, throwing down the gauntlet to the New, has found
it unexpectedly ready, is shown by the presence of the Stars and Stripes
on the battlefields of France. The mask of our isolation by the ocean,
that time-worn excuse, has been rudely torn aside by modern inventions,
and the affairs of Europe have become by their intimacy our own. In
mingling with them as we were forced to do, one side was bound to
transgress sooner or later—Germany did. And when Germany transgressed,
America stepped across the bridge from youth to manhood, and picking up
the iron gauntlet proceeded to settle the question by force of arms,—the
one indisputable argument.

This war is to make Democracy secure only in that it is the continual
struggle between the new and the old, a struggle whose issue is certain
before the start—civilization moves to the west.

America is the vanguard of the European civilization moving westward. It
has taken the sum of the civilizations of the earth to bridge the chasm
of the Atlantic. America is the last section of the circle of the world,
which completed, civilization moves back to its starting place. Power
increases with civilization and, with each step civilization has taken,
the conquests have been proportionate. Each has tried world conquest and
failed, but each has come nearer and each time the world has been nearer
ready to receive it. The present war is the attempt of a representative
of the civilization of Europe to control the earth, and proving _per se_
its unfitness to do so.

Consequently, the relation of America to the War is that she is coming
of age, and is at last ready to take her place among the great nations
of the world as a power that can never again be disregarded, a mighty
guardian of the Right.

                  *       *       *       *       *

AMERICA has been aptly called the Melting Pot. Since 1620, when the
Pilgrims established their permanent colony at Plymouth, people from the
Old World have been flocking to this country and becoming “Americans.”
Every country of the globe has sent its representatives—each a different
metal to be merged with the others until the American should be as
distinct a type as the Englishman or Frenchman. At first there was
natural discord—each was a different metal in the melting pot, but as
there was no heat, no fire, they could not amalgamate. Then came the
first blast of national fire—the Revolution, and in that, the first
great struggle for Liberty, was moulded from the composite alloys—the
American. The American as he came from the mould of the Revolution was
the foundation on which the country rests, and although the descendants
of those Americans are too few in number now to be more than a flux for
the steady stream of metal as it pours from the pot, they can at least
preserve the standard that their forebears passed down to them as the
Golden Heritage, and be examples to these new and untried metals.

In the War of 1812 and in the Civil War the new metals were amalgamated
and tempered with the old, but since 1864 there has been no fire hot
enough to mould together the millions who have sought the United States
as a home. There has been no sword over our heads. There has been no
great impending disaster, no danger to the country as a whole of great
loss of life or property, and our Liberty and our Honor have not been at
stake as they are today.

So it is now in this fierce blast from Hell’s furnace, the Great War,
that the National fire is rekindled and each metal is slowly sinking its
own individuality into the common form carefully stirred by the hand of
the Almighty, and in the white heat, as the pure metal is tempered until
it rings true and measures to the old standard, the slag is cast aside.
Thus is America the Melting Pot.

                  *       *       *       *       *

PARIS is the place where everything begins and ends. From here during
the four years of war there has been the constant departure of men bound
for the great adventure, and it is Paris that has received with open
arms the greater bulk of the _permissionnaires_ and the _réformés_. Gay,
very gay on the surface, but below the crust it is the saddest of all
places. When a man is in great agony he laughs. It is so with the great
city, and the laugh of delirium is a poor sham indeed.

The shortage of necessities has also been a damper on the city. In
Neuilly, a suburb of Paris, a man was carrying a bag of coal. A few
paces behind him a well-dressed woman was walking home. The man dropped
a piece of coal from his sack and the woman eagerly picked it up and
placed it in her gold bag.

The war hangs over all in a dismal cloud and is in the back of every
one’s mind; although it is rare to hear it mentioned it is always before
one. There is no Parisian who has not lost some one very dear to him or
her, and nineteen out of every twenty women are in deep mourning. The
social activities, therefore, are greatly curtailed, and the gay life is
left only to the people of the street, the majority of whom have been
driven to that life by the reaction of despair and sadness, and in
lonesomeness seek the only companionship that they know.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE old chateau at 21, rue Raynouard, so kindly loaned to the American
Field Service for its headquarters by the Comtesse de la Villestreux, is
a place of traditions. The great Napoleon has walked here. Rousseau
wrote part of his works here, and Franklin walked in the park daily
while he was Ambassador to France.

The park is the most extensive and beautiful within the fortifications
of Paris, and contains the largest grove of chestnuts in the city. The
water in the springs on the place was famous in the seventeenth century
as the “_eaux de Passy_.”

In the shadow of the Eiffel Tower, located on the banks of the Seine,
the place breathes an atmosphere of rest and beauty and solidity,
springing from the traditions of age. The men of the American Field
Service, we who have had this place as the home to which we would return
_en permission_, can never fully express our sincere gratitude to the
Comtesse de la Villestreux and the other members of the Hottinguer
family, who so graciously extended to us, Americans, the hospitality of
their beautiful estate.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A DREAM of a town, hot but not oppressive under the sun of the Midi,
with quaint streets meandering through it, little blue tables set in the
sunlight and a park filled with gay-colored soldiers and drab women, was
my first impression of Bordeaux. Dilapidated _fiacres_ in tow of hungry
horses transport one from place to place, and give the newcomer his
first taste of the haggling, without which a Latin would be
disconsolate.

For all its quaintness and simplicity it is as much a “pay as you enter”
city as the rest, and even in the park should one sit upon an iron seat
instead of a wooden one there is an indemnity of two _sous_ extracted
and a further _sou_ should the seat possess arms. A damsel in black then
presents a ticket which entitles the possessor to hold down the seat as
long as he comfortably can. The military may sit free, however, if they
know it; but the new arrivals do not, and the park fund increases.

Bordeaux on my return I found to be quite Americanized. The quiet
uniforms of our soldiers were neutralizing the bright reds and blues of
our ally. The little blue tables were often covered by a khaki arm, and
many new signs proclaimed “American Bar,” those houses which had
specialized in German beers before the war having painted “American”
over the name of the Rhine country.

There is a large American hospital here completely equipped and ready to
receive and take good care of the flood that will soon be pouring in. An
American private telephone line has been built to Paris by Americans,
and with our gradual assimilation of the railway system of France we are
“carrying on” well from here.

                  *       *       *       *       *

THE American Ambulance, the American Field Service as it was in the old
days, is dead. The spirit of _bonne camaraderie_ and intimacy which each
member felt for the others; the time when, members of no army, we served
with the French, on equal terms with the _poilus_ in the trenches and
the officers on the staff; when, responsible to no one, we served the
cause and the god Adventure, content with the past and with no thought
for the morrow,—has passed. With the coming of army discipline and
system, with governmental organization and routine, the old days are
gone. We are sorry, selfishly, to see them go; but we cannot and would
not have it otherwise. The Ambulance Service is now proudly enrolled
under Old Glory, and is broader and greater than it ever could have been
as a volunteer organization. We rejoice that it is so, and are proud
that we have been a part of it. So, hail to the new United States Army
Ambulance Corps! The men of the Old Ambulance salute you!

                  *       *       *       *       *

A LITTLE group of us stands together in the darkness, with the deck
rising and falling beneath our feet. We are silent and pensive. The last
lights of Bordeaux are fading in the mist, and with them France. The
boat has been running up and down the wide harbor all day, and now in
the darkness is making a dash for the open sea, hoping to outwit the
enemy lurking in the depths.

Up there, far to the north of those lights, the great guns thunder and
the sky glimmers with star-shells. Men are fighting, and struggling, and
dying, and laughing over their _Pinard_, but it is not for us. We have
finished for a while. Of course we are coming back, but furlough is not
offered often enough to be refused lightly. We feel a queer mixture of
sadness, and happiness, and relief. The life has worked its way into our
hearts, and the call to return rings in our ears. But the relief from
the tenseness and the joy of anticipation of America and Home exceeds
all else. The wind blowing across the waves starts somewhere in America,
and we take deep breaths. Soon we shall be home, shall see our friends,
and shall lead a life of luxurious ease again for a short space of time.

We walk around the deck and then, taking out our pipes, settle down in
our steamer chairs and puff thoughtfully. All is peace and quietness
here, the spray breaking over the bow and the waves lapping against the
sides. It is hard to realize that the earth is shaking in a cataclysm
only a little north, but we know that this must be endured until the
power of Germany is destroyed—that the world may be as peaceful as is
the sea tonight.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                GLOSSARY


[_The meaning of the words as given in this Glossary is that which holds
in the army at the front and sometimes conflicts with the meaning as
given in the dictionary._]

            ABRI                   _dug-out_

            AMBULANCIER            _ambulance driver_

            ARGOT                  _slang_

            ARRIVÉE                _an enemy shell_

            ASSIS                  _a wounded man able to
                                     sit up_

            BLESSÉ                 _wounded man_

            BONNE CAMARADERIE      _good-fellowship_

            BONNE CHANCE           _good luck_

            BOYAUX                 _communication trench_

            BRANCARDIER            _stretcher-bearer_

            BRIQUET                _pocket lighter_

            CAMION                 _truck_

            CAMIONNETTE            _small truck_

            CHEF                   _first lieutenant_

            CONDUCTEUR             _ambulance driver_

            CONTRE-AVION           _anti-aircraft gun_

            COUCHÉ                 _a wounded man lying
                                     down_

            CROIX DE GUERRE        _war cross_

            DÉPART                 _a shell fired towards
                                     the enemy_

            DUD                    _a shell which does not
                                     explode_

            ÉCLAT                  _shell fragment_

            EN PANNE               _breakdown_

            EN PERMISSION          _on furlough_

            EN REPOS               _on a rest_

            ESTAMINET              _café_

            MAJOR                  _army surgeon_

            MALADE                 _sick man_

            MARÉCHAL DES LOGIS     _French petty officer_

            MAUVAIS TEMPS          _rainy season_

            MÉDAILLE MILITAIRE     _military medal_

            MINNIEWERFER           _German trench mortar_

            MORT HOMME             _Dead Man’s Hill_

            MUSETTE                _haversack_

            PELOTON                _section_

            PERMISSION             _furlough_

            PERMISSIONNAIRE        _man on furlough_

            PINARD                 _wine_

            PIONNIER               _a branch of the
                                     Engineers_

            POSTE DE SECOURS       _front dressing station
                                     for wounded_

            RAVITAILLEMENT         _provisioning_

            RÉFORMÉ                _soldier discharged on
                                     account of wounds_

            ROLL                   _to drive_

            RÔTI                   _shell which does not
                                     explode_

            SAUCISSE               _observation balloon_

            SOIXANTE-QUINZE        _75 mm. shell_

            SOUS-CHEF              _second lieutenant_

            STRAF                  _to shell_ (literally,
                                     _to curse_)

            TIR DE BARRAGE         _barrage fire_

            TORPILLE               _trench mortar shell_

            VERBOTEN               _forbidden_

            VILLE HAUTE            _upper city_


------------------------------------------------------------------------




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
    ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
      when a predominant form was found in this book.
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).







End of Project Gutenberg's The White Road of Mystery, by Philip Dana Orcutt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE ROAD OF MYSTERY ***

***** This file should be named 59102-0.txt or 59102-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/1/0/59102/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Printer in Eighteenth-Century
Williamsburg, by Parke Rouse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Printer in Eighteenth-Century Williamsburg
       An Account of his Life & Times, & of his Craft

Author: Parke Rouse

Editor: Thomas K. Ford

Release Date: March 19, 2019 [EBook #59101]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINTER IN 18TH CENTURY WILLIAMSBURG ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  THE
                                PRINTER
                         in Eighteenth-Century
                             _WILLIAMSBURG_


             An Account of his Life & Times, & of his Craft


                      _Williamſburg Craft Series_


                             _WILLIAMSBURG_
                  Publiſhed by _Colonial Williamſburg_
                                  MMI

    [Illustration: Decorative page header.]




       _A Word to the Reader about Eighteenth-Century Typography_


    [Illustration: Decorative Capital.]

The paragraphs on this Page and the next have been ſet in an
eighteenth-century Manner. The Type uſed is _Caſlon_, developed in the
early Part of the eighteenth Century by _William Caſlon_, the greateﬅ of
the Engliſh Letter Founders. _Caſlon_ in 1734 iſſued his firﬅ Broadſide
Specimen Sheet of Type Faces cut at his Foundry during the preceding
Decade and a Half.

Although _Caſlon_ is famous for the beautiful Type that bears his Name,
he deſerves equal Credit for deſigning ſome of the moﬅ handſome Type
Ornaments or “Flowers” ever developed, before or after his Time. Such
Type Flowers had many Uſes—to embelliſh Initial Letters at the Beginning
of a Chapter in a Book; as decorative Devices in a ſingle Row over a
Type Heading ﬅarting a new Page in a Book; or over Headings each Time a
new Subject was introduced in a Text. Flowers were caﬅ to all the
regular Bodies of the Letter from the ſmall (_Nonpareil_) to the large
(_Great Primer_) Size. The Type Flowers uſed at the Head of this Page,
in the built-up Initial opening the firﬅ Paragraph, and elſewhere in
this Publication are reproduced from original eighteenth-century Flowers
excavated at the Site of the Printing Office on _Duke of Glouceﬅer_
Street in _Williamſburg_.

The longs “s” ſo evident in theſe Paragraphs originated in the _German_
Hand Script. Early _German_ Type Founders attempted to reproduce
Handwriting as cloſely as poſſible. In the Attempt the long “s” was
evolved and was adopted by the firﬅ _Engliſh_ Printers who learned their
Trade from the _Germans_. The long “s” remained in general Uſe until
about the Year 1800. It was always uſed at the Beginning and in the
Middle of a Word, but never to terminate a Word. It can eaſily be
recognized by the Fact of having only half a Croſſbar or none at all,
whereas the Letter “f” has a full Croſſbar.

Ligatures, ſuch as ct, ſb, ſſ, ſi, ſſi, ſk, ſl, ſſl, ﬅ, ﬁ, ﬃ, ﬀ, ﬂ, ﬄ,
were developed where a long “s” or an “f” overlapped the following
Letter. Caﬅing the two Characters together avoided Damage to the
overlapping Letter. Although ſome Ligatures have fallen into Diſuſe, the
ﬁ, ﬃ, ﬀ, ﬂ, and ﬄ are ﬅill common today.

Printers alſo applied, through much of the Century, ſome Rules of Style
which the modern Reader may find odd if not awkward. For Example, they
began all Nouns with a capital Letter, thus diﬅinguiſhing them from
other Parts of Speech ſuch as Adjectives, Verbs, &c. In the ſame
Faſhion, they capitalized Expreſſions of particular Emphaſis, and Titles
of Honor and Eminence. The Names of Perſons and Places they not only
began with capital Letters but usually ſet in _Italic_ Type as well.

With the exception of certain _Scottiſh_ faces, small Capitals were
found in _Roman_ Fonts of Type only. They were employed to denote
Emphaſis and Streſs, and were uſed where the large Capitals would not
fit, i.e., were too long. Small Capitals were alſo found in the firﬅ
Word of the firﬅ Paragraph after every Break in Context of a Chapter or
Section of Text.

Strange though ſome eighteenth-century Printing may appear to today’s
Reader, there is one Point that ſhould be ﬅreſſed. The Idioſyncracies of
a Type Page of the Period were not merely Whims of individual Printers.
They were the Faſhion of the Time. When a Printer uſed ſeveral Sizes and
Styles of Type on a Page, he was practicing what he and his
Contemporaries conſidered to be good Typography.




                             The Printer in
                           Eighteenth-Century
                             _Williamsburg_


    [Illustration: Decorative header.]




            _The Printer in Eighteenth-Century_ Williamsburg


    [Illustration: Decorative Capital.]

If you had visited Williamsburg in the year 1743, say, and wanted to
post a letter, buy a book, a newspaper, or some writing paper, or talk
with an influential townsman, you would have sought out the shop of
William Parks on Duke of Gloucester Street. Parks published the
_Virginia Gazette_, the first newspaper in the Virginia colony, and his
printing office served also as post office, bookshop, stationery store,
and general information center.

It was a place of many sounds and smells, and of much activity. There
you would find ink-smudged printer’s devils carefully sorting type under
the watchful eye of the journeyman printer, an accomplished craftsman
and exacting instructor. There you would also find the bookbinder among
his calfskins, marbled papers, glues, and presses. And on the shelves,
waiting for buyers, were pamphlets and leatherbound volumes produced in
the shop or imported from England.

Perhaps, if you were lucky, you might see a postrider burst in with
London papers, rushed from a ship just arrived from England. Then the
printing shop was never livelier, for the coming of news from abroad was
an exciting event. At such times, Printer Parks probably stopped what he
was doing, culled the choicest items from the London journals, and made
space for them on the front page of the next issue of the _Gazette_. In
a day or so, “the freshest Advices, Foreign and Domestick,” would be on
their way to Parks’s subscribers.

In the small (1,500 people) capital of Williamsburg, this printing
office was a nerve center through which news of the vast outer world
reached Virginians and, in turn, news of His Majesty’s largest American
colony was conveyed to other colonists and their homeland. By modern
standards it was a small printing shop. But in its effect on the people
of the Virginia colony, it was a powerful civilizing force. As one of
eight or nine printers of colonial newspapers, moreover, William Parks,
through his paper, kept the people of the other colonies informed of the
major events that were taking place in the oldest and largest outpost of
Britain in America.


                      _THE PRINTING OFFICE TODAY_

For these reasons, Colonial Williamsburg has re-created an
eighteenth-century printing office as one of its series of craft shops.
Here the twentieth-century visitor will find equipment such as was used
two hundred years ago in similar printing establishments on Duke of
Gloucester Street operated by Parks and later by William Hunter, Joseph
Royle, Alexander Purdie, John Dixon, William Hunter, Jr., William Rind,
and their successors. Here a master printer and his apprentice, in the
leather aprons and full-cut breeches of the period, set by hand type
closely resembling that which Parks used.

To print its pages of hand-set type, the present Printing Office has in
operation three so-called “English Common Presses” such as were built in
the eighteenth century. One, believed to have been made about 1750, was
given to Colonial Williamsburg by American Type Founders, Incorporated,
and the Rochester Institute of Technology. Of the other two, one was
designed by Ralph Green of Chicago after a careful study of the handful
of known eighteenth-century presses in the United States, and both were
built by Colonial Williamsburg craftsmen.

In addition to the _Gazette_, tracts, pamphlets, and books poured from
Parks’s press from the time he came to Williamsburg about 1730 until he
died on a voyage to England in 1750. Surviving examples of his work
reveal that he first used Dutch type, which was followed by the more
pleasing face so “friendly to the eye” developed by William Caslon in
England. From matrices similar to Caslon’s originals, his successors in
the type-founding business have cast the letters used on the restored
Williamsburg press. Parks’s neat printing and binding ornaments, so
characteristic of the classical-minded eighteenth century, have been
similarly reproduced. Eighteenth-century printers’ tools were made from
the careful drawings in Diderot’s Encyclopedia and from other sources.

To provide the kind of paper used by eighteenth-century printers,
Colonial Williamsburg began research in the 1930s into the history of
the town’s only paper mill. Started by Parks about 1743 with the help of
his friend Benjamin Franklin, the mill is believed to have outlived him.
Examples of its product were identified in 1936 in a German Bible and a
song book printed in Pennsylvania in 1763. Paper that simulated the
Parks paper was thereupon reproduced, and was used in some of the work
of the Printing Office and in some Colonial Williamsburg books designed
after examples of Parks’s work. Even the specks and spots of the
original Parks paper were imitated by a mixture of ground flaxseed
incorporated into the paper to insure the appearance of authenticity.

Visitors to the Printing Office today may not see counterparts of the
postriders who brought mail to Parks’s printing shop and post office,
but nearly everything else is there. As in colonial days, the central
figure is still the printer, bending over his press and producing in a
day’s work what one modern, mechanized press can turn out in a few
minutes.


                     _WILLIAMSBURG’S FIRST PRINTER_

Although the colony of Virginia was founded in 1607, it was not until
the eighteenth century that printing was established there. This delay
was largely due to governmental policy. In seventeenth-century England
and her colonies, freedom of the press was yet to be established. Even
laws passed by governing bodies could not without official permission be
printed and circulated for the benefit of citizens. Until the Licensing
Act of 1662 expired in 1695, the printing trade in England was confined
to London, the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and to the English
city of York. The governors of the royal colony of Virginia felt
empowered to refuse permission for the establishment of printing until
the year 1690, after which printers were governed by royal instructions
which required a license and permission from the governor as a
prerequisite to setting up shop.

Sir William Berkeley, who was governor of Virginia from 1642 to 1652 and
again from 1660 to 1677, summarized the attitude of most officials of
his day in his famous statement, “But, I thank God, there are no free
schools nor printing, and I hope we shall not have these hundred years;
for learning has brought disobedience, and heresy, and sects into the
world, and printing has divulged them, and libels against the best
government. God keep us from both.” (Berkeley was in error: free schools
_had_ existed in Virginia, though printing had not.)

In 1682, a few years after Berkeley wrote, a printer named William
Nuthead came to Jamestown, then the capital of Virginia, proposing to
serve the government by printing the acts of the Assembly. He was
ordered by the Governor’s Council to await royal approval. Several
months later a new governor arrived with an order from the king that “no
person be permitted to use any press for printing upon any occasion
whatsoever.” Nuthead moved to Maryland, and printing in Virginia was
delayed fifty years.

    [Illustration: _Title page of TYPOGRAPHIA, printed by William Parks
    upon the establishment of his press in Williamsburg; reproduced from
    the only surviving copy—in the John Carter Brown Library,
    Providence, Rhode Island._]




                             _TYPOGRAPHIA._
                                   AN
                                  ODE,
                                   ON
                               PRINTING.


                      Inſcrib’d to the Honourable
                         WILLIAM GOOCH, ^_Eſq_;
          His Majesty’s Lieutenant-Governor, and Commander in
                  Chief of the Colony of   _VIRGINIA_.


  —— _Pleni ſunt omnes Libri, plenæ ſapientum voces, plena Exemplorum
  vetuﬅas; quæ jacerent in Tenebris omnia, niſi Literarum Lumen
  accederet._
                                                  Cic. Orat. pro Archia.


                            _WILLIAMSBURG:_
                  Printed by William Parks. M,DCC,XXX.

Before 1730, however, a more tolerant attitude had developed. With the
permission of Governor William Gooch, the English-born William Parks
moved that year from Annapolis to Williamsburg, which had succeeded
Jamestown as the capital of Virginia in 1699. He was designated public
printer of Virginia, at an annual salary of £120 a year, eventually
increased to £280. Parks continued to print the acts of the Virginia
Assembly, which he had begun several years before in Maryland, and soon
advertised for subscriptions for a proposed _Virginia Miscellany_ “at
his House, near the Capitol, in Williamsburg.” Before the year was out
he had printed several works, at least five of which are known by title.
One of these is an ode to printing, _Typographia_, by one “J. Markland,”
which salutes Gooch for his encouragement of printing. In the high-flown
style of its day, the ode concludes:

  “_A Ruler’s gentle Influence
  Shall o’er his Land be shewn;
  Saturnian Reigns shall be renew’d
  Truth, Justice, Vertue, be pursu’d
  Arts flourish, Peace shall crown the Plains,
  Where GOOCH administers, AUGUSTUS reigns._”

Parks was Williamsburg’s most distinguished eighteenth-century printer
and probably its most successful. In the annals of his craft in America
he is ranked with Benjamin Franklin and William Bradford, the foremost
printers in Pennsylvania and New York. Parks, like all of his brethren,
depended for his bread and butter on printing blank forms (deeds,
mortgages, bills, and the like), government work (such as proclamations,
forms, and laws), almanacs, and other job work, but he helped establish
in the American colonies that dependence upon free and fair discussion
of issues in the newspapers which strengthened the concept of a free
press. He gave impetus to literature in a colony that had lacked the
local means for its encouragement. By his example, he was partly
responsible for the rash of journalistic enterprise in pre-Revolutionary
Williamsburg.

Parks’s most influential act was his founding of the _Virginia Gazette_,
the first newspaper to be published in Virginia and the second south of
Maryland. Begun in 1736, this weekly was the leader of a colorful
succession of similarly named sheets in Williamsburg and later in
Richmond, to which the Virginia government removed in 1780. And in these
_Gazettes_—in the 1770s published by as many as three competing printers
at a time—can be found a rich chronicle of the events in the colonies
leading to the American Revolution. Important foreign and domestic
occurrences were described in dispatches—perhaps taken in some cases
from private correspondence—and in excerpts from other newspapers. The
editor rarely reported local happenings beyond a brief mention of ship
arrivals, marriages, deaths, fires, and the like. He often printed legal
notices and entire acts of the Virginia Assembly, without comment.
Fulsomely phrased letters to the editor posed weighty questions of
government, science, or theology.

The modern reader will find the _Virginia Gazette_ of 1736 to 1750
undramatic in its lack of headlines, pictures, and display type. But the
ingredients of human interest are there, subtly in the note of
controversy which gradually built up to the Revolution, and emphatically
in the advertisements, which largely financed the _Gazette_. Many are
the notices of runaway slaves, strayed farm animals, husbands deserted
by wives, or blooded horses available for racing or breeding. From the
advertisements, also, the contemporary Virginia reader could learn of
the arrival of goods from London—articles of fashion that were highly
prized by Virginians as evidence of their Englishness. In an early issue
of the _Gazette_, Parks states:

               “Advertisement, concerning Advertisements

  “All Persons who have Occasion to buy or sell Houses, Lands, Goods, or
  Cattle; or have Servants or Slaves Runaway; or have lost Horses,
  Cattle, &c. or want to give any Publick Notice; may have it advertis’d
  in all these _Gazettes_ printed in one Week, for Three Shillings, and
  for Two Shillings _per_ Week for as many Weeks afterwards as they
  shall order, by giving or sending their Directions to the _Printer_
  hereof.

  “And, as these Papers will circulate (as speedily as possible) not
  only all over This, but also the Neighbouring Colonies, and will
  probably be read by some Thousands of People, it is very likely they
  may have the desir’d Effect; and it is certainly the cheapest and most
  effectual Method that can be taken, for Publishing any Thing of this
  Nature.”


                 _PRINTING IN AN AGRICULTURAL ECONOMY_

William Parks’s significant achievements seem even greater if one
understands the difficulties of operating a business in the Williamsburg
of 1730-1750. Because Virginia’s colonial prosperity was based on a
one-crop economy—tobacco—little “ready money” was in circulation within
the colony. The weed itself became a sort of currency. The usual
practice was for the plantation owner or the small farmer to subsist on
his produce and his credit until the crop was harvested and shipped to
English merchants, who from the proceeds of its sale bought for the
planter such articles as he had directed. Because all American tobacco
was transported to Britain in British vessels, shipping space was
plentiful on the westward passage, and shipowners and British merchants
offered Virginia buyers cheap freight rates on finished goods. Thus such
English manufactures as cloth, furniture, pewter, silver, and ceramics
were sold to Virginia planters and merchants.

The two-way trade between Virginia planters and British merchants slowed
down the development of a large Virginia artisan group. Accordingly,
local industry was limited in eighteenth-century Virginia, even in an
urban center such as Williamsburg. Virginia craftsmen complained
bitterly of unpaid accounts, the necessity of accepting such “country
pay” as tobacco, corn, and beef, and the paucity of buyers who offered
ready money.

It is easy to understand why William Parks found relatively few
craftsmen in the Williamsburg of his day. Except for a few trades such
as cabinetmaking, blacksmithing, coopering, wigmaking, tailoring, and
shoemaking, the Virginia capital was largely a community of taverns,
townhouses, and governmental institutions, and the colony itself was
overwhelmingly rural. There is no doubt that Virginia’s reliance on
agriculture, a reliance approved by British mercantile theory, resulted
in an overdependence on the industry of the mother country. We can thank
the peculiarities of Parks’s situation—the inability of English printers
to satisfy Virginians’ desire for regional news, and the subsidy Parks
received as public printer—that his craft became firmly established in
the 1730s in Virginia. Indeed, it seems clear that the prospect of
becoming Virginia’s public printer was what lured Parks from Annapolis
to Williamsburg in the first place.


                  _PARKS’S SUCCESSORS IN WILLIAMSBURG_

Altogether, Williamsburg had at least twelve master printers and three
separate printing locations or offices during the colonial period. After
Parks died on a voyage to England, William Hunter, the man whom he had
left in charge, bought the business. Publication of the _Virginia
Gazette_ continued, and Hunter became public printer and postmaster. In
the latter capacity he worked in close association with an astute
Philadelphia printer, Benjamin Franklin, with whom he served jointly as
deputy postmaster-general for all the colonies. Hunter printed in 1754
the first published writing of George Washington, entitled _The Journal
of Major George Washington, sent by the Hon. Robert Dinwiddie, Esq; His
Majesty’s Lieutenant-Governor, and Commander in Chief of Virginia, to
the Commandant of the French Forces on Ohio...._

    [Illustration: _Masthead of Purdie’s VIRGINIA GAZETTE before the
    adoption of the Virginia Resolution for American Independence on May
    15, 1776, by the Virginia Convention of Delegates meeting at the
    Capitol in Williamsburg._]




                      May 10, 1776.    NUMBER 67.
                                  THE
                           VIRGINIA GAZETTE.
              Always for LIBERTY,    And the PUBLICK GOOD.
                       ALEXANDER PURDIE, Printer.

    [Illustration: _Masthead of Purdie’s VIRGINIA GAZETTE, substituting
    type ornaments for a coat of arms of the Royal Colony of Virginia,
    the first issue after the adoption of the Virginia Resolution. There
    had not been time to develop a new cut._]




                      MAY 17, 1776.    NUMBER 68.
                                  THE
                           VIRGINIA GAZETTE.
                                THIRTEEN
                            UNITED COLONIES.
                  _United, we stand—Divided, we fall._
              Always for LIBERTY,    And the PUBLICK GOOD.

    [Illustration: _Masthead of Purdie’s VIRGINIA GAZETTE in a following
    issue, showing the new cut that reflected the growing spirit of
    independence._]




                      JUNE 7, 1776.    NUMBER 71.
                                  THE
                           VIRGINIA GAZETTE.
              Always for LIBERTY,    And the PUBLICK GOOD.
         _High_ HEAVEN _to_ GRACIOUS ENDS _directs the_ STORM:

After Hunter’s death in 1761, the printing office had a succession of
owners and operators. As tension increased between Great Britain and her
American colonies, especially after the adoption of the Stamp Act in
1765, the relation of public printer to government became more
difficult. The printer faced the necessity of maintaining good relations
with both loyalist and patriot elements in the House of Burgesses. One
loyalist reader of the _Gazette_, the Reverend John Camm, complained in
the early 1760s that Hunter’s successor, Joseph Royle, refused to
publish Camm’s pamphlet arguing the cause of Church of England clergymen
because of its “Satyrical Touches upon the Late Assembly.” On the other
hand, certain patriot members criticized Royle in the columns of the
_Maryland Gazette_ for allegedly refusing to print their criticisms of
local government. The printer was caught between fires.

Criticism of the _Gazette_ continued after Royle died in January 1766,
and Alexander Purdie, a Scotsman, took over the business. In what is
thought to have been his first issue, Purdie announced that “the press
shall likewise be as free as any Gentleman can wish, or desire; and I
crave the countenance and favour of the publick no longer than my
conduct may appear to merit their approbation.” Later the same month,
Purdie wrote, “As I understand it is thought by some that I have
neglected, or refused, to publish the account of a late transaction at
Hobb’s Hole [Tappahannock], this is to assure the publick ... that I
never saw the same, nor was it ever offered to me to publish, otherwise
it would have seen the light before this time: For I do now, as I have
heretofore declared, that my press shall be as free as any Gentleman can
wish or desire; that is, as free as any publick press upon the
continent.” In 1775, after Purdie established another _Virginia
Gazette_, his paper bore the appealing motto “Always for Liberty, and
the Publick Good.”


                         _TOWARD A FREE PRESS_

In spite of Purdie’s efforts, the trend was toward a competitive press.
A rival _Virginia Gazette_ was set up in Williamsburg in 1766 by William
Rind, a Maryland printer who was more sympathetic to the protesting
colonists than Royle and Purdie were thought to be. The motto of his
paper cannily proclaimed “Open to all Parties but influenced by None.”
Governor Francis Fauquier at this time reported to the British Board of
Trade: “The late printer to the Colony [Royle] is dead, and as the press
was then thought to be too complaisant to me, some of the hot Burgesses
invited a printer [Rind] from Maryland. Upon which the foreman [Purdie]
to the late printer, who is also a candidate for the place, has taken up
the newspaper again in order to make interest with the Burgesses.”
Jefferson, who in 1766 was completing his study of law, and was a friend
and admirer of Fauquier’s, recalled later: “We had but one press, and
that having the whole business of the government, and no competitor for
public favor, nothing disagreeable to the governor could be got into it.
We procured Rind to come from Maryland to publish a free paper.”

The hot-spirited Rind was elected public printer by the House of
Burgesses. However, the job being too much for one printer alone, the
Assembly in 1769 authorized both _Gazette_ publishers, Rind and Purdie,
to print a large volume containing the Acts of Assembly then in force.
Rind continued in office until his death in 1773 when his widow,
Clementina Rind, took over the business as Virginia’s first woman
printer.

The number of weekly newspapers in Williamsburg increased again in 1775
when Purdie, who had taken John Dixon into his business nine years
before, withdrew in favor of William Hunter, Jr., the son of William
Parks’s successor, and established his own _Virginia Gazette_. When the
Revolution broke in 1776, Williamsburg thus had three newspapers, each
called the _Virginia Gazette_. Rind’s _Gazette_ expired by 1777, after a
succession of managers, and Purdie’s (which was continued after his
death in 1779 by Clarkson and Davis) ceased publication in 1780. Dixon
formed a new partnership with Thomas Nicolson in 1779 after William
Hunter, Jr., had joined the British forces. Their newspaper was called
the _Phoenix Gazette and Williamsburg Intelligencer_, but it expired the
following year when these printers followed the seat of government to
establish Richmond’s first press.

So pronounced was the decline in Williamsburg’s fortunes that from the
year of the government’s removal until forty-four years later, in 1824,
Williamsburg had no newspaper. Old copies of the three _Gazettes_ were
treasured reminders of the town’s past glory. The name, _Virginia
Gazette_, and some of the tradition of Parks’s skill were remembered,
but little was done to perpetuate them until the late Dr. W. A. R.
Goodwin in 1926 invited Mr. John D. Rockefeller, Jr., to restore
Williamsburg. As a by-product of that movement, the proud masthead of
William Parks’s original _Virginia Gazette_ was revived in 1930 by the
late Joseph A. Osborne and his family. Likewise, in the realm of paper
manufacture, typography, book production, and bookbinding, Colonial
Williamsburg has revived the workmanship of William Parks and his
confreres. In such publications as _The Williamsburg Art of Cookery, or,
Accomplish’d Gentlewoman’s Companion_, published in 1938, and _A Brief &
True Report concerning Williamsburg in Virginia_, first published in
1935, Colonial Williamsburg emulated type, paper, format, and binding of
similar volumes from Parks’s press. And at its Printing Office, it has
sought to recapture the manner and mood of a colonial printing shop as a
part of its program to teach twentieth-century Americans more about the
lives and ideas of their pre-Revolutionary ancestors.


              _TECHNIQUES OF EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY PRINTING_

In considering the craft of printing, it is important to remember that
the western world has enjoyed the invention of movable type only since
the middle of the fifteenth century. For several centuries thereafter,
the new development was regarded with suspicion by church and state,
which, as we have seen, feared the freedom of thought that would ensue
if reading matter were readily available. Even in the eighteenth
century, an era of enlightenment, printing was suspect.

An equally difficult obstacle facing the colonial printer was the cost
of his press, his type, his paper, and his equipment. Eighteenth-century
industry was largely home operated, based on the capital and ingenuity
of one family. Yet the cost of equipping even the modest one- or
two-press shops of eighteenth-century America was a burden for most
people of the working class. In his famous _Autobiography_, Benjamin
Franklin gives a vivid picture of the immense labor and thought that lay
between a printer’s apprenticeship and ownership. To reach the level of
success that Franklin and Parks achieved required not only skill but
unusual industry and shrewdness.

Eighteenth-century appraisals of several printing houses indicate an
average value of £100 to £125 currency. We may suppose that William
Parks set up shop in Williamsburg in 1730 on some such scale as this,
adding type and other equipment to the value of £359 Virginia currency
or £288 sterling at the time his equipment was sold to William Hunter in
1751. Undoubtedly Parks’s three presses and his type constituted his
chief equipment. The presses presumably were of the English common sort,
which had then been in standard use in the British Isles for nearly one
hundred years. The type was an alloy of lead, tin, and antimony, the
letters having been cast in Holland or England, and probably was valued
at more than the rest of Parks’s facilities together. For the rest,
equipment consisted of such printers’ staples as poles for drying paper,
“shooting sticks,” quoins, planes, type cases, type racks, composing
sticks, lye troughs, wetting troughs, and other paraphernalia. For
bookbinding the printer needed other instruments, some of which could be
made in Williamsburg. The majority of the tools, however, were imported
from Great Britain or Holland.

    [Illustration: _A paper mill. Here are shown the operations involved
    in making a sheet of paper in the eighteenth century. (1) The vatman
    dipping the deckle and screen into a vat of paper pulp. (2) The
    coucher removing the deckle and pressing the freshly formed sheet of
    paper on felt. (3) Preparing the new paper for pressing. (4) A rack
    for stacking wet sheets of paper prior to their being pressed. (5)
    Details of the paper press. (6) Details of the vat._ DIDEROT.]

As he received each font or size of type, the colonial printer would
distribute it in a set of four wooden trays, two for Roman type and two
for italic. These contained partitions for each “character,” or “sort,”
as the letters and numerals were called. Such partitions varied in size
depending on the frequency of use of each letter or numeral, and they
were so placed as to permit the printer to assemble type with a minimum
of movement. (Because capital letters are usually arranged in the upper
two cases and small letters in the lower two, printers traditionally
refer to them as “upper case” or “lower case,” respectively.)

In setting a page of printed matter the colonial printer rapidly plucked
the necessary characters, one by one, from their compartments in the
upper and lower cases. He placed them, with proper spacing, in a
“composing stick” set to the proper length of line. When the stick was
full he transferred the type to a shallow wooden tray called a “galley.”
Having assembled in the galley enough type to form a page, the printer
“tied it off,” i.e., bound a piece of string tightly around the whole
mass. Then he could slide the assembled page off the galley onto the
surface of the “imposing stone,” a flat marble working surface. Such
transfers of type—especially from composing stick to galley—were often
attended with accidents. One of the printer’s commoner frustrations was
to have a stick, a galley, or even a whole page form of type dropped and
“pied.”

On the imposing stone a rectangular wrought-iron frame or “chase” was
then placed around the type, and the finished page was locked into place
with wooden blocks and wedges called “furniture” and “quoins.” After
being locked, it could be picked up and moved to the printing press
without danger of the type falling out of place.

The eighteenth-century printer used paper made by hand from linen rags,
importing it from Great Britain in the earlier years while domestic
mills were gradually developing. Because such paper was uneven in
texture and poorly sized, it was dampened before being put on the press
to provide a more pliant working surface. For ink, Parks and his
contemporaries used a combination of lampblack and varnish, which remain
the chief constituents of printer’s ink today. Lampblack was obtained by
burning various materials and collecting the carbon in flues, while
varnish was made of pine resin boiled in linseed oil until a clear
liquid resulted. Most printers “rubbed” or mixed the lampblack and
varnish thoroughly. If the mixture was too thick, it could be thinned
with linseed oil or whale oil. If red ink was desired for two-color
printing, vermilion could be substituted for lampblack.

    [Illustration: _A view of a typical eighteenth-century printer’s
    composing room. Here type was set by hand to be printed on the
    press. (1) Setting type in a composing stick. (2) Transferring a
    stick of set type to a galley. (3) Planing a type form by beating
    lightly on the type surface with a block of wood and a mallet._
    DIDEROT.]

    [Illustration: _A typical press room. The puller and beater are
    shown in two stages of the operations. On the left, a sheet of paper
    is placed on the tympan by the puller, and the type is inked by the
    beater. On the right, the puller is printing an impression on the
    paper, and the beater is distributing ink on his stocks while he
    inspects the previous pull._ DIDEROT.]

Once the printer or his apprentices had set the type, pulled a proof,
“made up” the type into pages with the proper spacing and ornaments, and
then locked it into forms by means of furniture and quoins, he placed
his form on the press and adjusted it to get the most even impression.
Then he was ready to begin the actual process of printing. Whereas
printing is commonly done today by automatic presses, fed with paper
either mechanically or by hand, it had to be done one sheet at a time in
the eighteenth century. Two men usually worked the press, and the
printing of a single impression required approximately a dozen different
manual operations.

To ink his press, preparatory to printing, the “beater” spread the
necessary amount of ink on his mixing block and rubbed it to an even
consistency—that of stiff molasses—with a wooden brayer. With two
leather-covered balls attached to wooden handles, he then collected ink
from the stone, beat the “ink balls” together to distribute the sticky
fluid over their surfaces, and then with a rapid rocking and rolling
motion, transferred it onto the type. Then the “puller” placed his paper
on a skin-covered wooden frame called a tympan and folded over it
another light covered frame, called a frisket. These two frames in turn
folded down onto the bed of the press, where the type was locked in its
iron form or chase.

The actual impression was made by rolling the bed of the press, complete
with folded tympan and frisket, beneath the platen, which was suspended
from a large metal screw. By applying the force of the screw, the puller
pressed the paper firmly against the inked type. The size of the printed
matter might vary from a small bookplate or lottery ticket to a sheet
twelve by eighteen inches, which was roughly the page size of Purdie and
Dixon’s _Virginia Gazette_ of 1759. Whatever the dimension, the beater
had to ink his form and the puller had to close and open his press again
each time a surface was printed. Since the platen was so small, only
one-half of a two-page wide newspaper could be printed at a time on the
early press, and a repeat operation was required to complete one side of
the sheet. Thus the press was sometimes called a “two-pull” press.

Two experienced pressmen, working at full speed, could turn out a
“token” or 240 printed sheets (with two pulls and on one side only) per
hour. Such a speed could not long be maintained; the practical output
was closer to 200 sheets per hour. But wages were low, working hours
were long, and the printer could keep his force on the job until the
work was done.


                       _THE PRINTER AND HIS MEN_

Because of its close association with literature, the craft of printing
has generally attracted a more intellectual type of craftsman and
enjoyed a prestige greater than most others. Over the centuries, master
printers have jealously enforced the standards of their predecessors,
insisting today, as in the eighteenth century, on a long apprenticeship
for learners. Upon completion of the stipulated learning period and
achievement of the required proficiency, the apprentice then, as now,
became a journeyman. A mature and experienced worker at this stage, he
was qualified to take his leave of his master, if he desired, and to
practice his craft where he wished. When such a printer engaged in work
for himself and employed others, he became a master printer.

The apprentice system was in some respects a great boon to
eighteenth-century craftsmen, for it provided cheap labor in return only
for training and the necessities of life. Each master took into his
establishment a number of youngsters, hoping that some might prove of
“bright genius and good disposition.” To these he obligated himself to
provide food, shelter, and in most cases, clothing. The apprentice
thereupon became a member of the printer’s household, performing any
chores assigned to him in the home, shop, or printing office. But
although apprentice labor was cheap, it was unskilled and often inept.
Apprenticeships were frequently broken off, and only the relatively few
youths who were suited for the work and desirous of learning the “art
and mystery” of the craft kept at it until accepted as journeymen at the
age of twenty-one.

Many accounts have come down to us of the abuses as well as the uses of
the apprentice system. Runaways were frequent, as attested by
advertisements such as the one William Parks ran in the _Virginia
Gazette_ in 1745 for the return of a “smooth-tongued” apprentice “who
makes Locks, and is dexterous at picking them.” Sometimes mere children
were apprenticed by poorer families who were unable to support them.
Isaiah Thomas, a New England printer, was indentured at the age of six.
In return for his training and keep, he bound himself to avoid
drunkenness and carnal pursuits and to serve his master until he became
twenty-one. However, the majority of apprentices were indentured at
fourteen, to serve until they reached man’s estate.

The apprentice system largely supplied the printer’s need for unskilled
labor, but he could supplement it with slaves or with indentured
servants. The latter were usually young Englishmen of the lower classes
who had emigrated to America and who had bound themselves to a term of
labor in return for their voyage. Unlike apprentices, however, they were
not required to be taught to print.

Trained, or journeymen, printers were scarce in colonial times, and they
seem to have been often on the go. Even master printers moved about
frequently. William Parks had engaged in printing in three English towns
and in Annapolis before coming to Williamsburg in 1730. William Rind,
who established his paper in Williamsburg in 1766, came there from
Annapolis. Of Williamsburg’s other master printers and journeymen, some
were locally trained but others had been apprenticed in England.


                    _A NOTE ON THE PRINTING OFFICE_

Although the Printing Office of Colonial Williamsburg does not attempt
precisely to re-create any particular colonial printing shop, it does
represent the craft as it was practiced in the mid-1700s. Here the
twentieth-century American is invited to pause and look about him.
Perhaps, if he is in a receptive mood, he may sense the spirit of the
talented William Parks, keeping a watchful eye over apprentices and
journeymen while type is set, presses are inked, and impressions are
pulled from the press. Perhaps he can discern some Virginia planter
making his way to Parks’s bookshelf, to buy Allestree’s _The Whole Duty
of Man_ or Bayly’s _The Practice of Piety_ to take with him to his
plantation and read during winter evenings.

Entering the Printing Office, the visitor finds himself in a typical
Williamsburg structure of the eighteenth century. Fireplaces on each
floor of the shop warm the workers in cold weather and dry the printed
sheets of paper hung on overhead racks. Many-paned windows provide most
of the shop’s illumination during daylight hours, and also a place—in
the bays on Duke of Gloucester Street—for the printer to post signs and
samples of his work. At night and on dark days candelabra hanging from
the ceiling and tin sconces against the walls hold candles whose smoky
flames blacken the plaster as they help to light the working areas.

On the street floor are the post office, stationery, and bookselling
counter—one of the important areas of the normal colonial printing
office, since it combined three of the most important sidelines. Along
with the shelves of books for sale, some bound in leather and some in
temporary paper covers, there is a mail rack with slots for letters and
newspapers.

    [Illustration: _A bookbindery. In this view, several important
    binding operations can be seen. (a) Beating folded sections of a
    book so that they will lie flat. (b) Stitching folded sections to
    the heavy cords that hold the book together. (c) Trimming the edges
    of a freshly sewn book on a ploughing press. (d) Pressing freshly
    bound books in a large standing press. BELOW. (1-3) The blocks and
    hammer used by the binder. (4) The sewing frame. (5-6) Twine. (7-12)
    Parts of the sewing frame. (13-14) Wood or bone folders._ DIDEROT.]

On the same floor is the printer’s “counting room” or what would
nowadays be called his “accounting department.” Here he kept the
numerous business records called for by the cumbersome bookkeeping
systems of that day, penned business letters, and perhaps wrote out in
longhand the material he intended for publication in the _Virginia
Gazette_. Eighteenth-century printers often engaged in several other
businesses at the same time—importing goods of almost any kind, selling
farm products on commission, and trying anything that might turn a
penny.

Excavation of the Printing Office site and careful study of the
surviving eighteenth-century foundations and brick flooring gave
evidence—in the form of reinforced footings—as to where at least one
press may have stood. This was in the lower floor of the building, where
again today the shop’s printing operation is concentrated. There the
three presses mentioned earlier occupy the center of the room, all of
them in working order. Large racks for the storage of type line the
wall, surmounted by open, slanting cases of type in current use. The
cases contain a complete set of Caslon letters, from the diminutive
Nonpareil (6-point) to Six Line Pica (72-point), which is one inch tall.
Usually the printer employs the Pica (12-point) and English (14-point)
sizes, which were customarily used in colonial times. He and his
colleagues identified type sizes by name only; since the present point
system was not in use then.

Printer’s ink and its ingredients—varnish, lampblack or vermilion, and
linseed oil—are kept in saltglaze jugs. Other vessels contain drinking
water, and the wetting trough is filled, ready for dampening paper
before printing. On the floor, weighted boards atop stacks of wetted
paper keep the sheets from curling as the dampness permeates evenly
throughout the pile.

    [Illustration: _Title page of AN INQUIRY ..., printed by Alexander
    Purdie. Written in the midst of the Stamp Act controversy, this
    influential pamphlet presented a reasoned view of the colonists’
    position. It appeared before Purdie formed a partnership with John
    Dixon._]




                                   AN
                                INQUIRY
                                INTO THE
                    Rights of the BRITISH Colonies,


                        Intended as an Anſwer to

_The Regulations lately made concerning the Colonies, and the Taxes
      impoſed upon them conſidered._

         In a Letter addreſſed to the Author of that Pamphlet.

                    By _RICHARD BLAND_, of Virginia.

  _Dedit omnibus Deus pro virili portione ſapientiam, ut et inaudita
  inveﬅigare poſſent et audita perpendere._
                                                             Lactantius.


                             WILLIAMSBURG:
                  Printed by Alexander Purdie, & C^o.
                               MDCCLXVI.

Here the printer and his helpers set type, pull proofs and correct their
galleys, make up pages on the marble imposing stone, prepare paper and
ink, run off the job on one or more of the presses, and finally,
redistribute the type to the cases. The printed sheets, in the meantime,
may have to be hung on ceiling racks to allow both ink and paper to dry
out.

In the small back shop, a separate building, the similarly cluttered
bookbinding shop may be found. In it the bookbinder of today, working
with the tools and methods of his eighteenth-century predecessors, sews
together the printed and folded signatures that make a book, binds them
in boards, and covers the boards—perhaps in elegantly decorated leather
bindings. He may use marbled paper of his own making for end-papers or
on the outer covers of smaller books. For tooling and lettering the
cover he has a collection of brass dies, some of which are designed from
lettering stamps excavated in the vicinity of his—and William Parks’s
workshop.


                        _OUR PRINTING HERITAGE_

From the crude presses of Williamsburg came an ingredient essential to
the movement toward American self-government and independence—the
political pamphlet. In the world of the eighteenth century, devoid of
radio, television, or the bulky daily paper, the substance of political
debate came from such pamphlets. It was also an era which took its
political philosophy seriously, and the author of a pamphlet could count
on wide readership among the planter-aristocrats who controlled the
machinery of government. Williamsburg, as the colony’s capital and its
political and intellectual center, was the obvious city to lend its
imprint to the speculations of Virginia’s pamphleteers.

One of the most significant early tracts was Richard Bland’s _An Inquiry
into the Rights of the British Colonies_, printed by Alexander Purdie in
March 1766. Writing in the aftermath of the previous year’s fiery Stamp
Tax debates, Bland vigorously proclaimed his belief in Locke’s doctrines
of natural rights and natural law. Reprinted in London, Bland’s tract
was evidence of the mounting sentiment for self-rule in the colonies.
Bland’s _Inquiry_ was also a memorial to its author, a man who devoted
much of his life to public service. An aged delegate to Virginia’s first
state legislature in October 1776, Bland collapsed in the Williamsburg
streets on his way to a session, and died hours later in the home of his
friend, John Tazewell.

    [Illustration: _Jefferson’s SUMMARY VIEW, from the press of
    Williamsburg’s only woman printer. Of all of Jefferson’s writing
    this has been described as the document second only to the
    DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE in influencing the colonies to break
    from England. Printed by Clementina Rind, this is an example of the
    type of document not readily accepted by some Williamsburg printers
    and for which the Rinds were encouraged to establish themselves in
    the eighteenth-century Virginia capital._]




                                   A
                              SUMMARY VIEW
                                 OF THE
                                 RIGHTS
                                   OF
                            BRITISH AMERICA.
                           SET FORTH IN SOME
                              RESOLUTIONS
                            INTENDED FOR THE
                               INSPECTION
                             OF THE PRESENT
                               DELEGATES
                                 OF THE
                          PEOPLE OF VIRGINIA.
                                 NOW IN
                              CONVENTION.


                     By a NATIVE, and MEMBER of the
                          HOUSE of BURGESSES.
                         _by Thomas Jefferson._


                             WILLIAMSBURG:
                      Printed BY CLEMENTINA RIND.

The most important pamphlet printed in Williamsburg was _A Summary View
of the Rights of British America_, from the pen of Thomas Jefferson.
Lying ill up-country in August of 1774, when Virginia’s legislators were
convened in Williamsburg to send off delegates for the First Continental
Congress, Jefferson wrote his tract to suggest instructions that might
guide these delegates at Philadelphia.

The _Summary View_ was read aloud by Peyton Randolph in his home on
Market Square to a room filled with Virginia patriots. It was too
radical for some, but moving to all. It was at once set in type by
Clementina Rind, Williamsburg’s only woman printer. Among the first to
purchase a copy was George Washington, who noted in his diary that it
cost him three shillings ninepence. The pamphlet was reprinted in
Philadelphia and London and has been described as second only to the
Declaration of Independence in charting the American course toward
independence. John Adams of Massachusetts testified that the _Summary
View_ gave Jefferson “the reputation of a masterly pen” among Congress
delegates in 1776 and won for the Virginian his assignment to draft the
Declaration.

To the Williamsburg printer we owe a word of thanks for the important
part that he has played in the affairs of this early Virginia
capital—affairs that had notable influence on the course of American
history. Since civilization began, the communication of ideas has
largely depended upon the written word. The eighteenth-century printers
of Williamsburg—and all America—served that need at a time of great
moment, when the destiny of the emerging ideals of political democracy,
free speech, a free press, and freedom of conscience was uncertain. They
had the privilege of enlisting their craftsmanship in the service of
freedom, peace, and plenty, goals that continue to beckon mankind.

To the printer’s art, then, we wholeheartedly render the tribute which
J. Markland pronounced in _Typographia_, in 1730, as he saluted Governor
Gooch and Printer Parks for giving Virginia its first press:

        “_Happy the Art, by which we learn
        Gloss of Errors to detect,
        The Vice of Habits to correct,
  And sacred Truths, from Falsehood to discern!
        By which we take a far-stretch’d View,
  And learn our Fathers Vertues to pursue,
        Their Follies to eschew._”
              _1730-1780_

    [Illustration: Decorative footer.]

    [Illustration: Decorative header.]




                 _The Master Printers of_ Williamsburg
                              _1730-1780_


1730-1750 _William Parks._ Printer and publisher in three English towns
      and in Annapolis before he opened the first printing office in
      Williamsburg in 1730; founded the _Virginia Gazette_ in 1736; died
      in 1750.

1751-1761 _William Hunter._ Probably learned printing as an apprentice
      to Parks, whose foreman he became; bought the printing office from
      Parks’s estate in 1751; was jointly with Franklin deputy
      postmaster-general for the colonies from 1753 until his death in
      1761.

1761-1766 _Joseph Royle._ Born in England; became Hunter’s foreman about
      1758 and married Hunter’s sister; co-legatee, with Hunter’s minor
      son, of the printing business; died in 1766.

1766-1773 _William Rind._ Came from Maryland to Williamsburg in 1766 on
      the invitation of Jefferson and other “hot Burgesses” who thought
      Royle too submissive to the governor; established a rival
      _Virginia Gazette_ and continued it until he died in 1773.

1766-1779 _Alexander Purdie._ Born and trained in Scotland; was foreman
      to Royle, whose will bequeathed him an interest in the business
      along with Royle’s minor son and William Hunter, Jr.; took John
      Dixon as partner, and himself stepped out when young Hunter came
      of age in 1774; established a new printing office and issued a
      third _Virginia Gazette_ until his death in 1779.

1766-1780 _John Dixon._ Had been Royle’s business manager before the
      latter’s death, and thereafter married his widow; partner in turn
      of Purdie, William Hunter, Jr., and Thomas Nicolson; moved to
      Richmond in 1780.

1773-1774 _Clementina Rind._ Widow of William Rind; continued his
      printing business for one year—from his death in 1773 until her
      own in 1774.

1774-1777 _John Pinkney._ Continued the Rind printing business and
      _Gazette_ on behalf of the Rind children from Clementina’s death
      until some time in 1777.

1775-1777 _William Hunter Jr._ Natural son of William Sr., who
      bequeathed him the printing shop, lot, and half-interest in the
      business; on coming of age became active partner of Dixon;
      partnership dissolved in 1777; Hunter, a loyalist, followed
      Cornwallis to Yorktown in 1781 and thence to exile.

1779-1780 _Thomas Nicolson._ Succeeded William Hunter, Jr., as Dixon’s
      partner in 1779; the firm moved to Richmond the following year.

1779-1780 _John Clarkson._ Nephew of Alexander Purdie; continued
      Purdie’s _Gazette_ and printing business for about a year in
      partnership with Augustine Davis.

1779-1780 _Augustine Davis._ Had been one of Purdie’s printers; with
      Clarkson continued as successor to Purdie until 1780.

  _Henry Bowcock_, _William Stark_, and _Robert Miller_ were connected
  with printing in Williamsburg during the years 1730-1780, but it is
  not known in what capacity.

    [Illustration: Decorative header.]




                   _Suggestions for Further Reading_


Bernard Bailyn, ed., _Pamphlets of the American Revolution, 1750-1776_.
      Vol. I: _1750-1765_. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
      1965.

Susan Stromei Berg, comp., _Eighteenth-Century Williamsburg Imprints_.
      New York: Clearwater Publishing Co., 1986.

Charles E. Clark and Charles Wetherell, “The Measure of Maturity: The
      _Pennsylvania Gazette_, 1728-1765.” _William and Mary Quarterly_,
      3rd Ser., XLVI (April 1989), pp. 279-303.

Richard Beale Davis, _A Colonial Southern Bookshelf: Reading in the
      Eighteenth Century_. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1979.

Hannah Dustin French, “Early American Bookbinding by Hand,” in Helmut
      Lehman-Haupt, ed., _Bookbinding in America: Three Essays_.
      Portland, Me.: Southworth-Anthoensen Press, 1941.

Rutherfoord Goodwin, “The Williamsburg Paper Mill of William Parks, the
      Printer.” _Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America_, XXXI
      (1931), pt. 1.

Dard Hunter, _Papermaking in Pioneer America_. Philadelphia: University
      of Pennsylvania Press, 1952.

John Edgar Molnar, _Publication and Retail Book Advertisements in the
      “Virginia Gazette,” 1736-1780_. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms
      International, 1978.

C. Clement Samford and John M. Hemphill II, _Bookbinding in Colonial
      Virginia_. Williamsburg: Colonial Williamsburg, 1966.

Cynthia Z. Stiverson and Gregory A. Stiverson, “The Colonial Retail Book
      Trade: Availability and Affordability of Reading Material in
      Mid-Eighteenth-Century Virginia,” in William L. Joyce, David D.
      Hall, Richard D. Brown, and John B. Hench, eds., _Printing and
      Society in Early America_. Worcester: American Antiquarian
      Society, 1983.

Isaiah Thomas, _The History of Printing in America, with a Biography of
      Printers, and an Account of Newspapers_. 2nd ed. Albany: American
      Antiquarian Society, 1874.

Lawrence C. Wroth, _The Colonial Printer_. Portland, Me.:
      Southworth-Anthoensen Press, 1938.

——, _William Parks: Printer and Journalist of England and Colonial
      America_. Richmond: William Parks Club, 1926.


_The Printer in Eighteenth-Century Williamsburg_ was first published in
1955, inaugurating this series of craft pamphlets. Written originally by
Parke Rouse, Jr., then director of publications at Colonial
Williamsburg, it was revised in 1958 by the late Thomas K. Ford, editor,
and has been reprinted in 1964, 1970, 1974, 1978, 1985, 1987, 1990,
1993, 1995, 1997, and 1999.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—Silently corrected a few palpable typos.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—Transcribed the text of specimen pages.

—Where possible on specimen pages, retained long-ſ and ligatures (but
  not typefaces) in the UTF and HTML versions.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Printer in Eighteenth-Century
Williamsburg, by Parke Rouse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINTER IN 18TH CENTURY WILLIAMSBURG ***

***** This file should be named 59101-0.txt or 59101-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/1/0/59101/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The London Medical Gazette; December 27, 1828, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The London Medical Gazette; December 27, 1828
       Being a Weekly Journal of Medicine and the Collateral Sciences

Author: Various

Release Date: November 5, 2016 [EBook #53450]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON MEDICAL GAZETTE, DEC 27, 1828 ***




Produced by John Campbell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  The 'Apothecary System' of measurement was used in the original text.
  The etext uses the following Unicode symbols:
      ℞      Prescription symbol
      ʒ      Dram
      ℥      Ounce
      ℳ      Scruple
  Roman numerals, and 'ss.' for 'half', are retained, so for example
  '℥iss.' indicates 'one and a half ounces'.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  More detail can be found at the end of the book.




  THE
  LONDON MEDICAL GAZETTE,

  BEING A
  WEEKLY JOURNAL
  OF
  Medicine and the Collateral Sciences.

  SATURDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1828.




PATHOLOGICAL ESSAYS

ON SOME

DISEASES OF THE HEART;

_Being the Substance of Lectures delivered before the College of
Physicians_,

BY P. MERE LATHAM, M.D.

Physician to St. Bartholomew's Hospital.

[Continued from p. 7.]


ESSAY II.

_Morbid Anatomy of the Internal Lining Membrane of the Heart._

The membrane which lines the cavities of the heart is very liable
to disease, but not equally so in every part. Where it is thin
and transparent, and admits the colour and character of the
muscular structure upon which it is spread to be seen through it,
it is seldom found diseased; but where it is of a denser texture,
either in itself or from an admixture of other structures, whether
cellular or fibrous, with its own, it is frequently, and often
exclusively diseased. This latter character of a denser texture
belongs to it where it forms the tough white circles which surround
the apertures of communication between the auricles and ventricles;
also where it is reflected upon itself, and forms the loose
duplicatures of membrane, which are given off, as it were, from
the internal surface of the heart, either at the fibrous circles
intermediate between the auricles and ventricles, constituting the
tricuspid and the mitral valves, or at the commencement of the
pulmonary artery and aorta, constituting the semilunar valves.

It is remarkable how curiously disease is apt to limit itself to
the spaces just pointed out. Of the fibrous circle between the
auricle and ventricle, of the valves which originate from it, and
of the tendinous cords which connect the valves with the carneæ
columnæ, there will not be the smallest space free from disease;
but the disease will abruptly stop where the tendinous cords cease
and the carneæ columnæ begin[1].

The membrane, however, where it covers the fleshy columns of the
heart, is not exempt from the possibility of disease: but when
disease actually affects it, it has seldom originated there,
but has generally spread from other parts of the same membrane,
although (as we have just remarked) it is apt to stop short before
it reaches this.

Of the two sides of the heart, the membrane which lines the left is
unquestionably the more liable to disease. But my own observation
would never have led me to conclude that the membrane of the right
side was so far exempt as it is commonly thought to be. Speaking
from the best recollection I have of the specimens which have
fallen under my examination, I should say that, in one-third of the
cases where disease has been found on the left side, it has existed
on the right side also, and been essentially of the same character.
But there has been a remarkable difference in the extent to which
it has proceeded on each side respectively: while on the left it
has gone so far as to be the undoubted cause of death, on the
right, although essentially of the same character, it has been only
just beginning.

It very seldom happens that disease appertains to the lining of
the right cavities of the heart exclusively; and, where it affects
both, the disease in the right cavities is very seldom found in
advance of that in the left.

It should seem, indeed, according to the ordinary course of things,
that disease does not begin in the lining of the right cavities of
the heart, until it has already advanced to an extreme degree in
the left.

The internal lining of the heart, as well as of the arteries, is
often found to have become of a red colour. This redness, so well
known to all who are accustomed to examine dead bodies, used to be
regarded as a mere stain imparted to it by the colouring matter
of the blood after death. Yet a due consideration of various
circumstances connected with it will hardly warrant this conclusion.

It has been found whether the heart or artery be full or empty of
blood; and if blood be present it has been found, whether it is
liquid or clotted; and if it be clotted, whether it does or does
not retain its colouring matter. External temperature, and length
of time between the death of the patient and the dissection of his
body, have not made any difference in the frequency with which
this peculiar appearance occurs. Lastly, no artificial methods,
such as washing of any kind, can get rid of it; nor will inclosing
blood within an artery for any period produce it[2]. This simple
redness is sometimes seen universally in both sides of the heart
and throughout the whole arterial system, and sometimes in patches
only, of greater or less extent, whether in the arteries or in the
heart.

Now, when all these circumstances are considered, although in some
instances it may be a mere stain imparted by the colouring matter
of the blood after death, it is plainly impossible that it should
be of that nature in any large proportion of the numerous instances
in which it is found.

But if the appearance in question implies (as I believe it
generally does) a morbid condition, of what kind is that condition?
There are the same objections to considering mere redness as
equivalent to inflammation here as in the pericardium, or in any
other part of the body: here, as elsewhere, in one case it may
be the condition out of which inflammation is to spring; while in
another it may not be destined to give origin to any change in the
structure of the part beyond itself, and may itself constitute the
whole disease.

It appears to me, that this mere redness of the internal lining
of the heart and arteries has become a matter of undue perplexity
to pathologists, because they have laboured to infer from it
more than the simple fact itself will authorize. All I wish to
establish concerning it is, first, that it is not always (probably
very seldom) a mere stain imparted by the colouring matter of the
blood after death; secondly, that it alone does not constitute
inflammation.

It may not be improper to mention the circumstances under which
it has occurred to myself to find it. I have met with it most
frequently, and to the largest extent, in subjects whose previous
disease has produced a constant and habitual impediment to the
transmission of blood through the heart and through the lungs,
and that impediment has gone on increasing to the hour of their
death; also in those, whatever might have been the nature of
their disease, whose dissolution (I mean the actual process of
dying) has been tardy and agonizing, and marked by great labour of
respiration; in the apoplectic, for example, in whom, after sense
and consciousness were extinct, life had been protracted, with
stertorous breathing, for many days.

In such subjects the countenance, the lips, and the whole skin,
give evidence during life of blood pushed beyond the natural sphere
of the circulation, and detained in the extreme blood-vessels.
Hence it is obvious that the causes which have loaded and distended
the capillaries in every part of the body have had a like influence
upon the vasa vasorum.

I do not mean to say that I never met with this peculiar condition
of the heart and arteries under other circumstances, or that
other causes may not produce it; but that I am not acquainted
with it under any other with which, from frequent coincidence, it
has seemed to have a natural connexion, or which have afforded a
reasonable explanation of the phenomenon.

This condition of the heart and arteries, considered as
inflammation, has been assigned by some as the cause of fevers
of the more malignant kind. The frequency with which it has been
found in some particular epidemic, must have led to the conclusion.
But, however this may be, from my own observation, not restricting
myself to the fever of any particular season, but taking into
account all complaints called febrile, and belonging to all
seasons, also from the result of inquiry among medical men who
have had large acquaintance with morbid dissections, and from the
experience of those who have made this particular point a subject
of investigation (Laënnec and Andral) I venture to conclude that it
has no essential connexion with fevers of any kind, either as cause
or as effect.

On some occasions the internal membrane of the heart and arteries,
wherever it exhibits the appearance described, will allow itself to
be peeled off from the subjacent structure with the least possible
force; this facility of separation ceasing entirely beyond the
boundary of the red tinge.

Here unquestionably is further evidence of a diseased condition:
but of what nature? Most pathologists would consider this to be of
the nature of inflammation--and I believe justly.

There is indeed much difficulty in pronouncing upon the nature of
minuter changes of structure detected in the internal parts of the
body after death. We are obliged to arrive at conclusions by help
of analogies drawn from morbid processes, which we have watched in
their progress during life, upon the external surfaces; for during
life we have the functions and sensibilities of the part to aid us
in forming a right judgment concerning its disease. When, during
life, one tissue is separated from another, as the periosteum from
the bone, or the cuticle from the skin, or the mutual cohesion
between different tissues is sensibly weakened, we find it to be
owing to the intervention of serous fluid which does not belong to
their healthy state; and this, together with increased vascularity,
or redness and heat, and pain, is enough to bespeak the presence
of inflammation. All these conditions cannot remain after death.
Hence, if we desire to form positive opinions concerning much
which is unfolded by dissection, we must supply the defect by
analogy. Thus, whenever, in any part of the heart or arteries,
the cohesion between the internal membrane and the subjacent
structure is manifestly lessened, and the membrane is unusually red
at that part, we may regard these appearances as the vestiges of
inflammation, without thinking that we go too far in so regarding
them.

The internal lining of the heart and arteries is often found red
solely in the neighbourhood of ulcerated spaces, when there can be
no doubt concerning the existence of inflammatory action.

But the internal lining of the heart and arteries gives the most
unequivocal evidence of its inflammation when it is found of a deep
red colour, with coagulable lymph adhering to its surface. This
condition is represented, as it was found in the aorta, in one of
the beautiful plates, illustrative of the diseases of arteries, by
Mr. Hodgson[3]. And the same condition, in the heart, I have seen
in a preparation of Dr. Farre's, where lymph is deposited, upon the
circular zone, which forms the aperture of communication between
the left auricle and ventricle. These appearances denote the most
acute inflammation: they are, I suspect, very rarely met with. In
the few instances in which I have heard of them, they have been
found where death has taken place after short and severe suffering,
and with symptoms which characterize inflammation.

But the specimens of disease most frequently met with in the
internal lining of the heart, consist in an entire change of its
natural structure, and in the formation of new products upon it or
within it. Many of these, from the analogy of morbid actions in
other parts of the body, must be considered to result from chronic
inflammation.

In any of those situations which have been stated as especially
liable to disease, the membrane will become thick, tough,
inelastic, puckered and shrivelled; and cartilage or gristle, and
bone, will enter into its structure; excrescences will sprout out
from it, resembling warts and fungus; and it will become ruptured
and ulcerated.

Cartilaginous depositions are often found beneath the membrane
where it is single; or between its folds where it is double, in
the situation of the valves; and thus they seem rather to belong
to some structure contiguous to the membrane than to the membrane
itself. Such depositions will proceed to a considerable extent,
while the membrane still remains free from disease. From a valve,
which has been thick, opaque, and cartilaginous, I have seen the
membrane separated on both sides, and transparent; the opaque and
cartilaginous matter being left behind. Where, in cartilaginous
depositions, the lining of the heart has become puckered and
uneven on its surface, and the valves shortened and altered in
their shape, the membrane itself participates in the disease,
and is generally incapable of being separated from the subjacent
structure. But great thickening may take place in the situation of
the valves, from deposition of cartilage, without any unevenness
of their surface or alteration of their shape; and under these
circumstances the membrane itself you may expect to find hitherto
exempt from disease[4].

Osseous depositions are always, I believe, originally formed
beneath, or exterior to, the membrane, both in the heart and in
the arteries. There are two circumstances especially worthy of
remark in this process of ossification: sometimes it is a pure and
unmixed process: bone is formed, and nothing else. It is deposited
in minute granules, or little brittle scales, or in plates of a
larger size; and the intermediate spaces, whether in the heart or
arteries, preserve their natural and healthy appearance. At first,
these granules or scales, or plates of pure bone, are covered by a
delicate pellicle, which is in fact the internal membrane of the
heart or artery, separating them from the immediate contact of the
circulating blood. But in process of time, as they increase in
size, and become rough and unequal on their surface, they cause a
rupture of the internal membrane, and have now nothing to separate
them from the immediate contact of the blood[5].

Sometimes ossification is a mixed process, or rather, I suspect,
the result of another morbid process preceding it. With the
cartilaginous depositions already described there is an admixture
of bone. The quantity of bone generally bears a very small
proportion to the cartilage when they both occur together, as if
the bone proceeded from the cartilage, and not the cartilage from
the bone. It is sometimes seen growing from the surface of the
cartilage, and is sometimes deposited in its substance, and only
detected by the knife.

Simple ossification, as it occurs in the heart and arteries, has
been classed among the natural changes which the parts in question
are liable to undergo after a certain period of life. Of persons
above the age of sixty years the proportion is that of seven in ten
according to Bichât, in which ossification is discovered in some
part of the arterial system. It very rarely happens that simple
ossification is found before the period of old age: still it is
difficult not to regard it as a morbid process.

But ossification, when it is a mixed process, is unquestionably
the result of disease. It is met with at all periods of life; and
probably constitutes one of the terminations of inflammation. The
kind of morbid structures with which the bone is united leads to
this belief.

Fungous, and wart-like excrescences, are found in all those parts
of the internal lining of the heart, which have been already
mentioned as most subject to disease. They seem to be the result
of a new morbid action set up in parts already disorganized; for
I have not met with them where the membrane has been otherwise
healthy, but only where it has been thickened or cartilaginous, or
ossified, ruptured, or ulcerated. They grow either from the surface
of the membrane, or from its ruptured or ulcerated edges, and are
always in immediate contact with the circulating blood[6].

According to my observation, when a fungous or warty excrescence
has grown from the ruptured edges of the membrane, it has been from
them exclusively, and from no other part of the lining of the same
heart. And as rupture of the membrane seldom occurs in more than
one situation at a time, the heart of the same individual seldom
presents more than one excrescence of this kind: and as the aortic
valves are the parts most liable to rupture, it is there that this
single excrescence is most frequently found; not that rupture may
not take place elsewhere. I once saw a single _chorda tendinea_
ruptured; and a single fungous excrescence of considerable size
hanging from it into the cavity of the left ventricle.

Now, this morbid growth is evidently connected with the lacerated
state of the membrane in the conditions of its production, whereby
it is limited to a small space.

It is probable that the membrane is first ruptured; that its
lacerated edges inflame, and then throw out unhealthy lymph, or
unhealthy granulations, in the shape of these fungous or wart-like
excrescences. When they have sprung from a ruptured membrane, they
have, in the specimens which I have examined, been larger than when
they have arisen under other conditions.

But when such excrescences grow from the surface of the membrane
which is thickened and cartilaginous only, but not lacerated, they
are more apt to occur in many parts of it at the same time. I have
seen the valvular apparatus between the auricles and ventricles on
both sides, as well as the aortic valves of the same heart, studded
with them. They were all about the size of hemp seeds: they adhered
to the membrane with different degrees of tenacity, and wherever
they were capable of being detached, they left a rough surface.
The lining of the arteries has been known to give origin to morbid
growths of the same kind, which have obstructed the passage of
blood, and given occasion to the formation of a coagulum, which has
obliterated the pulse.

The internal lining of the heart is liable to ulceration, not as
a common consequence of simple inflammation, but as an occasional
consequence of some of those diseased conditions which have been
described.

It is most commonly found around scales and spiculæ of bone, and
under such circumstances as to leave no doubt that the bone itself
has furnished the source of irritation from which it springs. The
ulceration commences from the very border of the bony scale, as if
it was a process of nature for detaching it, and to a considerable
distance around the ulceration the membrane is reddened, and easily
detached from the subjacent structure. Where there are several
distinct scales of bone, it is not uncommon to find a circle of
ulceration around each of them.

Ulceration is also met with where there is a thickened and
cartilaginous state of the membrane without ossification. Under
these circumstances, as far as I know, it affects no definite form.
It is often a very destructive process of disease, obliterating
large portions of the valvular structure, and penetrating deep into
the muscular substance of the heart.

Rupture of the internal lining of the heart is not easily
distinguished from ulceration. In collections of morbid anatomy,
many unquestionable specimens of ulceration are described as
specimens of rupture. Rupture must always be looked for in the
valvular apparatus of the heart, _i. e._ in the valves themselves,
or in the chordæ tendineæ which are their appendages. It is
probably incapable of taking place elsewhere, except as a part of a
rupture, which involves the whole organ.

That solution of continuity which is evidently without loss of
substance; that of which the separated edges when they are brought
together are completely adapted to each other; also that which
is unaccompanied by any thickening or other morbid condition of
the valve; the solution of continuity which is found under these
circumstances, may safely be considered to proceed from rupture,
and not from ulceration[7].

But it is probable that these characteristic conditions do not long
remain after the occurrence of the rupture. Complete specimens of
them are very rare; but specimens are numerous where the solution
of continuity, by its form and direction, bespeaks rupture, while
its rounded edges and the general thickening of the valve denote
ulceration. These, it may be fairly conjectured, do in fact exhibit
a compound of both. The membrane was originally ruptured, but
disease has subsequently arisen and obscured the character of the
mechanical injury.

The greater number of those concretions, which were regarded by
the older anatomists as polypi of the heart, were unquestionably
portions of mere blood, which had undergone coagulation after
death. The blood remaining in the heart after death discharges
itself of its colouring matter as it coagulates, and, giving off
processes between the muscular fasciculi, assumes a shape which has
suggested the name of polypus[8].

I have often found (I presume, therefore, that it is not an
uncommon occurrence) coagula of an irregularly laminated texture
having their colouring matter not entirely discharged, but
unequally distributed through them, which have been most intimately
adherent to some part of the lining of the heart. Of these some
have admitted of separation, while the surface of the membrane and
the surface of the clot were left rough at the place of contact,
and others were incapable of being detached without the membrane
being detached along with them. The appendix of the left auricle is
a situation in which they are apt to occur, and they are generally
accompanied by an extensively diseased condition of the lining
membrane. These coagula, from their laminated texture, and from
the intimacy of their union with the internal lining, seem to be
essentially different from polypi of the heart. They appear to be
connected with a process of disease in the membrane, and to have
obtained their union with it long before the death of the patient.

I once saw two separate tumors, entirely resembling what are called
polypi, between the carneæ columnæ of the left ventricle, and
firmly adherent to the heart; and in the centre of each a distinct
formation of pus. The heart was otherwise healthy[9].

There are three preparations in the museum of the College of
Surgeons, put up by Mr. Hunter himself, and noted by him as
exhibiting "Tumors on the inner surface of the right ventricle,
seemingly composed of layers of coagulable lymph one upon another,
the central part having the appearance of glary mucus." This last
appearance (the mucus) no longer remains in any of the three, but
in its stead there is a cavity. The tumors which I have mentioned
as originally containing in their centre a distinct formation
of pus, also now present in its stead a cavity. The preparation
preserved at St. Bartholomew's, and those at the College of
Surgeons, are probably specimens of the same disease.

Here what in the recent parts seemed to be pus or glary mucus, and
the cavities still remaining in the preparations, must suggest the
suspicion, that these tumors, whether they grew from the surface or
were deposited from the blood, had become organized, and afterwards
inflamed; and that the inflammation had terminated in the formation
of an abscess.




ESSAY III.

_Morbid Anatomy of the Muscular Substance of the Heart._

Dr. Baillie, speaking of inflammation of the substance of the
heart, says, "When the pericardium covering its surface is
inflamed, the inflammation sometimes passes a little way into
the substance of the heart:" and then he gives these as the
characteristic marks of such inflammation--that "it (the substance
of the heart) becomes much more crowded with small vessels than in
its natural state, and there are sometimes to be seen a few spots
of extravasated blood." Now, this undue vascularity, and these few
extravasated spots, where inflammation unquestionably belongs to
a contiguous structure, may be deemed sufficient evidence of the
muscular substance of the heart participating, or beginning to
participate, in the same disease; but, absolutely and exclusively,
it may be doubted whether more is not required to give a certain
assurance of its inflammation. Here, as elsewhere, we must look
for some of the proper products of inflammation; or for some of
the permanent changes of texture which naturally result from it,
according to its several modes of disorganizing.

It is a very rare event to find pus among the products of
inflammation of the substance of the heart: yet this event has
occurred twice to my observation. In one instance the whole heart
was deeply tinged with dark-coloured blood, and its substance
softened; and here and there, upon the section of both ventricles,
innumerable small points of pus oozed from among the muscular
fibres. This was the result of a most rapid and acute inflammation,
in which death took place after an illness of only two days. In
another instance, after death, which terminated an illness of
long duration and characterized by symptoms referable to the
heart, a distinct abscess was found in the substance of the left
ventricle, closed externally by a portion of adherent pericardium,
and connected internally with an ossified portion of the lining
membrane.

This diffusion of pus, or rather its formation in innumerable
separate points, throughout the muscular structure of the heart, by
a rapid and acute inflammation, is a singular occurrence. No such
case has ever fallen within the knowledge of the most experienced
in morbid anatomy, of whom I have made inquiry; neither has any
such (as far as I can learn) been recorded in books[10].

A single collection of pus[11], constituting an ulcer or abscess of
the heart, and resulting from chronic inflammation, is also a rare
occurrence, yet not so rare but that a specimen of it may be found
in most collections of morbid anatomy[12].

But independent of the formation of pus, softening and attenuation,
as well as induration and thickening of the muscular substance of
the heart, do, in different cases, according to the circumstances
under which they are found, both bespeak inflammation.

Together with the unequivocal evidence of inflammation in other
parts of the heart, the muscular fibres have at the same time been
found very soft and loose, and easily torn; and with this looseness
of texture the heart has sometimes presented a dark and almost
black appearance, and sometimes it has been almost blanched and
colourless. The deep dark tinge shews that the muscular substance
is unnaturally loaded with blood; whereas the absence of colour
shews that it is destitute of its natural quantity. These different
appearances do, in fact, belong to different stages of the same
disease. The first indicates inflammation of the muscular substance
in its present state of activity; the second, an irreparable
disorganization of the muscular substance left by inflammation,
when it has been unarrested in its earliest stages. The first is
found when death takes place _in a few days after_ the accession
of the disease; the second, when the patient survives the first
attack, and dies at a remoter period.

The inflammation, which produces softening and attenuation of the
muscular structure, is, I believe, always of an acute kind.

But induration and thickening of the muscular substance of
the heart is also the result of inflammation. This must be
distinguished from hypertrophy, or mere augmentation of bulk, of
which we shall speak hereafter. In this induration, which proceeds
from inflammation, there is, besides increase of bulk and firmness,
a manifest alteration of texture. A substance[13] is produced
offering a peculiar resistance to the knife. This condition
unquestionably must result from an interstitial deposition of new
matter among the muscular fibres. From concomitant circumstances,
as well as from its own character, I presume that it proceeds
from chronic, not from acute inflammation. I confess that I never
saw a specimen of what I now allude to. It is described with some
minuteness by Corvisart; but it may be presumed to be very rare,
since Laënnec admits that it never fell under his observation.

These opposite states of softening and attenuation in one case, and
induration and thickening in another, are known to those conversant
with morbid dissection as the evidences of inflammation in other
parts of the body besides the muscular substance of the heart.

But there are changes of structure incident to the muscular
substance of the heart which are independent upon inflammation,
or, perhaps, upon any process which can properly be called morbid.
They consist of simple augmentation and simple diminution of bulk
and consistence. This simple augmentation of bulk and consistence
is owing exclusively to a more ample development of natural
structure. The muscular substance is more red than natural, its
carneæ columnæ are increased in thickness, and its proper fibrous
texture is every where more strikingly manifest; but there is no
interstitial deposition of matter new in its kind. It has been
called hypertrophia of the heart, and the name conveys a tolerably
just idea of its actual condition.

The simple diminution of bulk and consistence is a condition the
exact opposite of the former. The muscular substance is less red
than natural; its proper fibrous texture less distinguishable; but
there is still the appearance of muscle shrunk and withered, as
if from an insufficient supply of nourishment. It may be called
atrophia of the heart.

Conjoined with augmentation, as well as with diminution of strength
and bulk in the walls of the heart, there is almost always an
increase in the capacity of its cavities; and in whichsoever part
of the heart the walls are thus augmented or diminished, it is the
cavity appertaining to the same part which undergoes the increase
of capacity. Hence it appears either that one of these conditions
is the immediate and necessary consequence of the other, or that
both are the simultaneous effects of the same causes.

Dilatation of any cavity of the heart, with thickening of its
walls, is called _active dilatation_; and dilatation of any cavity,
with attenuation, is called _passive_[14].

Active dilatation may appertain to every cavity of the heart
simultaneously; and so may passive dilatation. But such occurrences
are very rare: for one cavity being naturally more liable to this
species of dilatation, and another to that, it most frequently
happens that specimens of both conditions are found in the
different cavities of the same heart.

The left ventricle is much more liable to active dilatation than
the right; and the right ventricle more so than either of the
auricles; and of the auricles unquestionably the left. Upon the
whole, perhaps, the fact may be truly stated thus--that the left
ventricle commonly gains an increase of bulk and strength, with an
increase of capacity; and that all the other cavities, at the time
that they expand, are rather apt to become attenuated.

It sometimes (though rarely) happens, that, with an increase of
strength and bulk in its muscular structure, the left ventricle
suffers a diminution of capacity in its cavity. In a case reported
by Laënnec, the left ventricle was an inch and a half thick at
its broadest, and an inch thick at its thinnest part; and yet its
cavity was only capable of containing an unblanched almond. I have
seen the same condition in a less degree.--(_Laënnec_, vol. ii.
698.)

The circumstances under which these opposite conditions, this
hypertrophy and atrophy of the heart, with the enlargement or
diminution of its cavities, arise, must be explained hereafter. At
present I would only remark that they are often found conjoined
with actual disease in other structures of the heart, such as
osseous or cartilaginous thickening of internal lining, adhesion
of the pericardium, and ossification of the coronary arteries, to
which they owe their origin; and, moreover, that they are often
found where the heart is otherwise perfectly sound in texture, and
where their cause must be sought in other parts of the body.

The heart is liable to undergo a simple dilatation of its cavities
without either thickening or attenuation of its muscular substance.
This simple dilatation is sometimes of the whole organ, sometimes
of one side, and sometimes only of one auricle or ventricle. When
it is of one cavity only, it may be complicated with active or
passive dilatation of another, or of all the rest.

There is reason to believe that the heart sometimes undergoes a
temporary dilatation, and again returns to its natural capacity;
but that the dilatation can only subsist for a short time without
becoming permanent.

The power of thus enlarging its cavities, and restoring them to
their natural condition, belongs more especially to the right side
of the heart.

A large accumulation of fat is sometimes met with about the heart.

The healthy heart is always more or less marked upon its external
surface with streaks of white, and this appearance results from
the deposition of fat in the cellular texture, which unites the
serous covering with the subjacent muscular structure. It is found
principally where the venæ cavæ unite to form the right auricle;
also at the base of the ventricles, and along the line which
marks the boundary between the two, and around the origin of the
great blood-vessels as they emerge from the heart. But when fat
is deposited in more than these situations, and in more than the
natural quantity, it is not so much added to the healthy substance
of the heart, as existing at its expense and detriment, and the
muscular structure is that which especially suffers. The fibre
of the fat heart is pale and wasted, like that of a paralytic
limb.--_Mus. of the Coll. of Surg._ 327.

A rupture of the heart is sometimes met with; but all the cases of
reputed rupture are not such in reality. An aperture in the walls
of the heart, through which blood escapes into the cavity of the
pericardium, may result from ulceration as well as from rupture,
or from a mixed process of one and the other; but whatever be the
precise nature of the process by which this perforation of the
heart is effected, it is undoubtedly of rare occurrence.

Where it has been found, there has generally been at the same time
some peculiar condition of the organ, which might be presumed
favourable to its production. Its muscular substance has been
so soft and loose of texture, that it could be pierced through
by the weight of a probe[15]; or it has been converted into, or
greatly intermixed with fat[16]; or its muscular fibres have been
absolutely defective, leaving a certain transparent space, where
the internal lining and the pericardium have been in contact,
and served to maintain the completeness of the cavity, until the
rupture has taken place[17].

Not that a rupture has not been found where the texture of
the parts has seemed to offer no natural facilities to its
occurrence--as in the case related by Harvey himself, who found a
lacerated aperture in the left ventricle, capable of admitting his
finger, through which blood had escaped into the pericardium, the
walls of the ventricle being increased in thickness and strength,
while an obstacle existed at the entrance of the aorta[18]. Here
the heart must have torn itself asunder by the simple violence of
its contraction, in contending against the impediment to the egress
of blood from its cavity. This is an effect which would hardly be
thought capable of being thus produced; but I can well believe it
possible after having seen one of the recti muscles of the abdomen
literally torn in twain, in a man who died of tetanus[19].

[To be continued.]




DILATED ŒSOPHAGUS.


_To the Editor of the London Medical Gazette._

  SIR,

Permit me to send the following case to you for insertion in the
Gazette.


Mary Blores, æt. 33, was admitted into the Middlesex Hospital on
the 16th of November. She was in a state of extreme feebleness and
emaciation. Those who brought her said that during the preceding
month she had appeared to swallow nothing: what she took as food
seemed to her to stop in the gullet, and after a few minutes
returned. I found, however, that a large œsophagus-bougie passed
readily into the stomach, meeting with no obstruction beyond a
spasmodic resistance in the pharynx. A draught of milk and water
was given her--she swallowed it without much effort, but it quickly
returned. In the course of the afternoon a pint of beef tea was
injected through an elastic tube into the stomach--it was thrown up
directly.

I now learnt from her that she could swallow liquids much more
readily than solid food; that when she took a small quantity,
it seemed to her not to reach the stomach, and in three or four
minutes was invariably thrown up; that on taking a large draught
she had an impression that it reached the stomach--in this case
vomiting did not follow so soon, and some part of the draught was
permanently retained; that she craved food and drink, and was
literally dying of hunger and thirst; that the vomiting which took
place was not preceded by nausea, although in its progress it had
all the appearance of ordinary retching; that the matter vomited
was not thrown up at once, but by successive efforts; it consisted
of the food she had last taken, mixed with colourless mucus. The
belly was so shrunk that the umbilicus was not more than an inch
distant from the spine, upon which the pulsations of the aorta
were readily felt: there was no enlargement or hardness about the
stomach, no particular tenderness on pressing the epigastrium, no
sensation of pain or heat now or formerly.

The complaint had began ten years ago, during pregnancy, since when
she had never been free from it, although at times her sufferings
had been less, and she had been able to retain some portion of her
meals. She had borne in this period three children; the vomiting
had lasted during the whole period of her pregnancies, and during
her confinement. The principal remedies which had been used for her
relief were a succession of blisters on the pit of the stomach--but
they had produced no benefit. Latterly her symptoms had been
greatly aggravated.

This patient was attended by Dr. Watson and myself. But the means
which we tried to enable her to retain her food, and to support her
expiring strength, had scarcely a temporary effect. She died on the
2d Dec. sixteen days after her admission. The body was carefully
examined, at the expressed wish of her relatives.

The unusual appearances found in the abdomen were--1. the smallness
of the first part of the duodenum, which was but half the ordinary
size of the ileum; 2. the capaciousness and fulness of the gall
bladder,--from which, however, on compressing it, the bile flowed
readily into the intestine; 3. a contraction of the middle of
the stomach of the length of two inches, for which extent the
peritoneal coat was thickened and opaque, and the inner membranes
folded in deep longitudinal rugæ, the mucous surface of which was
partially suffused with circular spots of red. The breadth of the
contracted part of the stomach, as it lay collapsed, was an inch
and a half.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

But it was in the chest that the most remarkable circumstance
presented itself. The œsophagus gradually enlarged from the
pharynx, which was perhaps rather narrower than usual, to an
extraordinary degree of dilatation; the greatest breadth which it
attained was situated about four inches above the cardia: the tube
then contracted more abruptly, so as to render the termination
of the œsophagus, like its commencement, of nearly the usual
dimensions. The structure likewise of the cardiac extremity for
about an inch, and of the pharyngeal end for about half an inch,
was healthy. The intermediate part presented, when inverted, the
following curious appearance:--The inner membrane was thickened
and opaque, and had _the appearance_ of having partially yielded
from dilatation; at the upper part the furrows or thinner parts of
the membrane followed in some degree a longitudinal direction; at
the lower part the surface was pitted with shallow depressions of
various figures. I have represented in the adjoined sketches these
appearances, which on the middle of the œsophagus passed from one
into the other; at the furrows or depressions the membrane seemed
of the natural thickness and colour; the intermediate raised and
thickened part was opaque and whitish. The muscular fibres of the
œsophagus were of the natural colour and thickness.

  I remain, Mr. Editor,
  Your obedient servant,

  HERBERT MAYO.

  19, George-street, Hanover-square,
  Dec. 6, 1828.




HYDROPHOBIA.


_To the Editor of the London Medical Gazette._

  SIR,

As the following case may throw some additional light on the
pathology of hydrophobia, I have sent it you for publication.

  I am, Sir,
  Your obedient servant,

  F. GODRICH.

  Grove House, Little Chelsea,
  Nov. 29, 1828.


On Thursday morning, the 25th ult. I was called up about seven
o'clock to see a man who I understood was exceedingly ill, and
waiting in the surgery very impatiently for my arrival. I found
my patient (Mr. Barham), a fine looking old man, about 60,
labouring at intervals of about five minutes under strong spasmodic
paroxysms, affecting the muscles concerned in breathing and
deglutition. There was a wildness and an impatience depicted in his
countenance, totally different from any thing I had ever observed
in other spasmodic affections. His bowels were open, tongue clean,
skin moist, pulse full and a little accelerated. I took away
twenty ounces of blood, and prescribed a mixture containing ʒss.
of laudanum for a dose every hour until I should see him again.
He walked home half a mile from my house (Gloucester Road, Old
Brompton), and left me ruminating on the possible cause of so much
mischief occurring suddenly in a fine healthy subject. At ten a
message was sent, saying that he was much worse, and requesting
me to call as soon as possible. He received me tranquilly, and
said he was very glad that I had come to see him, for he was very
ill. His symptoms were now more distressing than when I first saw
him: he looked wildly and suspiciously at every one entering his
apartment, and his breathing was accompanied by a short convulsive
sobbing. On looking at his medicine I perceived he had taken none,
and expressing my surprise, he assured me it was impossible for
him to swallow a single drop, as the attempt had been followed
by violent spasms, and produced so much distress, that he had
desisted. At this period no one had the slightest idea of the
origin of his malady. I poured out some medicine into a tea-cup,
the very act of which produced much excitement and alarm. My first
impression as to the true nature of his disease arose at this
period, from the circumstance of his requiring a tea-spoon, with
which he endeavoured to take some of the medicine. The attempt
produced much excitement and alarm, and after two or three painful
efforts at deglutition, with one desperate effort he swallowed a
tea-spoonful, threw away the spoon, and begged, unless I wished
to destroy him, that he might have nothing more to swallow. I
now left his room, and inquired of a bystander whether any thing
particular had occurred to him within the last few weeks. On
recollection she said, "About a month since, late at night, a
strange dog came into the premises and fought with his own dog; he
got out of bed to separate them, and the strange dog bit him in
two places, on the left arm and hand; and bit a puppy, which died
about a fortnight after in a strange way, which was thought to be
some kind of a fit." To ascertain if this occurrence had produced
any effect on his mind, while again bleeding him I said, "You have
been in the wars, Sir, and had your hand and arm torn; how did
it occur?"--"Oh!" said he, carelessly, "that was done by a dog a
long time ago, but it healed." The circumstance was never again
mentioned to him, and he died in total ignorance of the cause of
his malady. The wounds were perfectly cicatrised, and there was not
the least action going on indicative of recent absorption. He bore
the bleeding pretty quietly: 40℥. were removed, which on cooling
presented strong marks of inflammation.

    Ordered ℳiv. Acid. Hydrocyan. omni horâ, in a little water.

Twelve o'clock.--With much difficulty he has taken two doses of the
acid; pulse full and hard, 110. 30℥. more blood were removed.

Three o'clock.--Has taken two more doses; complains of a dreadful
sense of suffocation, and implores that nothing more may be given
him. Pulse full, and beating at 120 to 130. Continue the acid.

Eight o'clock.--Pulse full and hard. Has taken in all 24ℳ. of the
acid, but so painfully distressing has the deglutition now become,
that all attempts at repeating his medicine are discontinued.

    V. S. ad ℥xxx.

During the bleeding he looked wildly at the basin, and begged
that no more might be spilt (a drop or two had fallen), repeating
frequently, in great agitation, as the blood was running, "Take
care! take care!"

Between two and three o'clock next morning my assistant (Mr.
Davies) visited him. He found him tolerably passive, but observing
every movement with intense anxiety. Pulse full and hard, face
flushed, eyes denoting cerebral irritation. He had been at times
outrageous. On its being intimated that bleeding was again
necessary, a paroxysm came on more intense than any preceding,--and
with great effort he submitted. As the blood flowed he became
more and more alarmed, till at length he got quite unmanageable;
he raged violently at his nephew, who was holding the basin, and
ordered it peremptorily to be removed. 30 or 40℥. were taken
away. It was found necessary to put on the straight waistcoat.
About four o'clock Mr. Davies wished him to take some more of his
medicine. He said, "I can take no more," and on reaching the bottle
to put out a few drops, he became violently agitated, threw himself
from side to side, and, as well as the incessant spasmodic sobbings
would allow, he begged that not one more drop of any thing might be
offered him, and that the bottle might be taken from his sight. He
did not become tranquillized until its removal. He lingered on till
ten A.M. in the same state, a few minutes before which he insisted
on getting up, and walked a short way down his garden, returned,
laid down on his bed, and died.

Mr. Frederick Salmon, of Old Broad Street, and Mr. Wilson, of
Chelsea, were kind enough to assist me in conducting the post
mortem examination. On opening the chest, the heart was free from
disease, with rather more water in the pericardium than natural;
the lungs were completely gorged with grumous blood, and the pleura
adherent on the right side. On removing the cranium, which was
remarkably thin, and cutting the substance of the brain, numerous
red spots presented themselves in the medullary portion; about a
table-spoonful of water in each ventricle; the plexus choroides was
turgid; the corpora, striata, thalami, and basis of the brain every
where preternaturally injected; the cerebellum, crura cerebri, and
cerebelli, in a high state of inflammation. On removing the spinous
process of the vertebra, the whole cord was considerably inflamed;
and opposite the two last cervical and dorsal vertebræ the cellular
substance was studded with dark patches of coagulated blood, the
theca vertebralis thickened, and the cord in an active state of
inflammation. The larynx and pharynx bore not the slightest vestige
of disease. The preparation of the cord is deposited in the museum
of the London University.

The post mortem examination of this case tends to prove the
correctness of Professor Thompson's theory of the proximate cause
and seat of this afflicting malady; and the plate accompanying a
case recorded by him, in the 13th volume of the Med. Chir. Society,
gives a faithful delineation of the state in which the spinal cord
was found in this case.




CASE OF LONG PROTRACTED CONSTIPATION.


_To the Editors of the London Medical Gazette._

  GENTLEMEN,

Perhaps the following case may interest some of your readers, and
if you think so, its insertion in your Journal will oblige

  Your obedient and
  humble servant,

  S. D. BROUGHTON.

  12, Great Marlborough Street,
  Dec. 3, 1828.


On Tuesday, Nov. 25, I was called upon at the St. George's and St.
James's Dispensary to advise for an infant at the breast, of five
months and fourteen days of age, that had not passed any fæces
during six weeks up to the day before I saw it. After its birth
it had no passage till the fifth day, and this had apparently
been effected by the introduction of a bougie, and which was
subsequently continued at intervals for a short time. The infant
was otherwise healthy and strong at its birth, and remained so
until it had gone about three weeks without any evacuation, when it
was observed to be weak in the lower extremities; and at the period
of my seeing it the legs were much fallen away in flesh, hanging
flaccid and inert. Many aperient enemas and medicines had been
given, and, as a last resource, one drop of the croton oil had been
prescribed the preceding evening. The infant appeared to suffer
from distention, and to be disposed to coma, and the croton oil had
distressed it much some hours after it was given. The fæces could
be felt blocking up the intestine, but the irritation of the finger
produced no attempt at evacuation; very small pieces only having
been brought away. Hot baths also had frequently been used some
time ago.

Considering the case as one of paralysis in the parts naturally
employed to relieve the bowels, I recommended the suspension of
all purgative remedies by the mouth, and a table-spoonful of the
following injection to be substituted, and to be thrown up with
three table-spoonfuls of thin gruel occasionally during the day, by
means of a syringe.

  ℞ Spir. Terebenth. ʒiij.
  Træ Zinzib. ʒj.
  Aquæ, ℥iss. M.

The following liniment was also directed to be rubbed in frequently
along the course of the spine.

  ℞ Linimenti Saponis, ℥iss.
  Liquor. Ammon. Comp. ℥ss. M.

The result justified my expectations; for, during the night after
this prescription, two injections having been given, some large
and hard ash-coloured lumps came away, and these were shortly
followed by a forcible spouting out of a continued stream of
feculent dark liquid; a brisk diarrhœa having been kept up till
the Saturday following. The infant's appetite is become voracious,
its appearance lively and healthy, and its legs as firm and strong
as is usual at such an age. Cold water is recommended to be dashed
upon the loins, the liniment to be continued occasionally, moderate
doses of magnesia and rhubarb to be given when required, and the
turpentine injection to be used if any return of the complaint
should be threatened.




DISLOCATION OF THE PATELLA.


_To the Editor of the London Medical Gazette._

  SIR,

Having seen a case of dislocation of the patella, reported by
Mr. Mayo, in your Journal a few weeks since, in which there was
experienced some difficulty in the reduction of the bone, I beg
leave to send you the following, in case you may think it worth
insertion.

On Saturday last, I was called to a young woman who had dislocated
the patella of the left knee joint outwards; the inner edge
rested upon the outer surface of the external condyle, and was
immoveably fixed, and caused great pain when touched. She says it
was occasioned by her foot slipping backwards from one stair to
another, and she immediately fell down.

I commenced the reduction, as stated by Mr. Mayo, but I could only
produce semiflexion, and that gave her great pain; insomuch that I
was obliged to desist, and the patella remained in _statu quo_. But
when the knee was thus semiflexed, I desired my assistant to extend
the leg suddenly; and having my fingers on the patella at the time,
and pressing it inwards, it immediately returned to its natural
position.

I must confess, sir, that I should have been afraid to have
continued the flexion as described in Mr. Mayo's case, "by bending
the knee to the utmost," fearing that the remedy might be worse
than the disease, and the result proved that in this case it was
not necessary.

  I remain, Sir,
  Your obedient servant,

  P. M. HOSKINGS.

  168, Fleet-Street,
  Dec. 3d, 1828.




VACCINATION.


_To the Editor of the London Medical Gazette._

  SIR,

The mistake of the printer in substituting the word "every" for
"even," in the paper on Vaccination (p. 40), so materially affects
the sense of the passage, that I must request the favour of the
following insertion:--

"3d. That while the vaccine cicatrix retains even one distinct
fovea or depression, the individual continues unsusceptible both of
small pox and of re-vaccination; but that," &c.

  I am, Sir,
  Your obedient servant,

  THOS. H. BURDER.

  2, Brunswick Square, Dec. 15, 1828.




SINGULAR BICEPS MUSCLE.


_To the Editor of the London Medical Gazette._

  SIR,

The valuable paper communicated to your Journal, by Mr. Stanley,
last week, has brought to my recollection a singular appearance of
the parts in front of the shoulder-joint which I dissected about
two years ago. It is a fact worth recording; and perhaps you will
be kind enough to insert it in your next number.

The circumstance was this--that in the right arm, instead of there
being a biceps muscle having two origins, the one the shorter from
the corocoid process, the other the longer from the upper part of
the glenoid cavity of the scapula, there was simply a one-headed
muscle arising from the corocoid process. I could find no tendon
passing through the joint answering to the long head of the
biceps, neither was there any appearance of a biceptical groove;
the capsular ligament was, perhaps, thicker than it is found in
ordinary cases.

I knew nothing of this man during life, and am therefore unable to
give any account of the use which he made of this arm.

  I am, your obedient servant,
  C. M. BURNETT.

  House Surgeon's Apartments,
  St. Bartholomew's Hospital, Dec. 8th.




STETHOSCOPE.


_To the Editors of the London Medical Gazette._

  GENTLEMEN,

As you did me the honour, on a former occasion, to publish some
remarks in defence of _auscultation_, against its enemies and
detractors, I trust you will permit me to say a few words in
reference to a communication in a late number, from a gentleman
who appears to be a friend of that method of diagnosis, but whose
ignorance of the subject is likely to be more injurious to the
cause than either open enmity or secret detraction. The case in
question (page 780, vol. ii.) appears, from the dissection, to
have been clearly _emphysema of the lungs_, as there stated; but
I appeal to every one practically acquainted with the physical
signs of diseases of the lungs, whether the results of the
exploration with the stethoscope, as narrated in the case, were
those pathognomonic of that disease? I say they were not only
not pathognomonic of this affection, but they were actually
incompatible with its existence. The same ignorance of the subject
is shewn in relation to the disease of the heart, which, I boldly
maintain, no one was justified in pronouncing to be _hypertrophy of
the left ventricle_ from the stethoscopic indications stated in the
case.

It is just possible that the writer of the case may have made
further explorations on which his diagnosis was founded; but if he
had such in his case-book, it is equally unfortunate for the credit
of the stethoscope and his own, that he suppressed them in his
printed case.

  I have the honour to be,
  Gentlemen,
  Your obedient servant,

  A STETHOSCOPER.

  Nov. 25, 1828.




MECHANISM OF VOMITING.


_To the Editor of the London Medical Gazette._

  Glasgow University, Nov. 26, 1828.

  SIR,

Having lately perused, in the 35th Number of the Medical Gazette,
some observations "on the mechanism of the act of vomiting," by
Dr. Marshall Hall, in which, after controverting the different
opinions which have been entertained by physiologists on this
question, he endeavours to prove that vomiting is an effort, not
of _inspiration_, but of _expiration_, and advances this opinion
as having originated in himself, I beg, through the medium of
your Journal, to refer that gentleman to Richerand's Physiology,
where, on the subject of vomiting, page 70, he says, "Sometimes the
action of the muscular fibres of the stomach is quite inverted;
they contract from the pylorus towards the cardia; and this
antiperistaltic motion, in which the contractions act with more
force and rapidity, and in a manner decidedly convulsive, produces
vomiting. The action of the abdominal muscles then connects itself
with that of the stomach; the viscera are propelled upwards and
backwards, by the contraction of the large muscles of the abdomen;
_the diaphragm ascends towards the chest; if it descended, in
contracting, the œsophagus that passes between its two crura would
be compressed, and the expulsion of food through the cardia could
not be effected_. It is also observed, _that during expiration
only, any thing can pass from the stomach into the œsophagus_."
Again, on respiration, page 147--"_In every effort of expiration_,
as coughing and _vomiting_," &c. Here, then, we see that Dr. Hall's
views, as far as regards vomiting being an effort of expiration,
have long since been advanced by Richerand.

The profession are certainly much indebted to Dr. Hall for his
corroboration of these views; at the same time he should not have
taken to himself the merit of having first suggested them.

  Sir,
  Your most obedient servant,

  A SUBSCRIBER.




CHARACTER OF THE LANCET.


_To the Editor of the London Medical Gazette._

  Dec. 19, 1828.

  SIR,

The events disclosed during the late trial in the Court of King's
Bench, must fill every well-disposed mind with astonishment and
horror. The moral aspect of the case is marked by every feature
capable of exciting a sense of shame for our profession, and of
sorrow for our kind. Can it be that a publication conducted in the
spirit of the extracts produced at the late trial of Cooper against
Wakley should be fostered and encouraged by a large proportion of
the medical public? Is it indeed true that no feeling of loathing
and disgust should have induced the purchasers of the Lancet to
protest against its glaring injustice, its undisguised ferocity and
malignity?

I am not a reader of that work myself, and but for the disclosures
recently made in our courts of justice, together with what I have
learned from your own pages, I should know little about it. Some
of its early numbers convinced me that it was a production not
deserving of support, whatever ability there might be connected
with it; subsequent events have amply justified this decision, and
I now address these few hasty lines to you, to express my humble
hope that all the respectable medical men throughout the kingdom
will arise, and with one voice oppose this moral pestilence, which
at once corrupts and degrades their profession.

The _odium medicum_, bitter and vindictive as it unfortunately has
been, never, I believe, appeared in a form so repulsive. Are we
living in the nineteenth century? Have arts and sciences, which
are asserted of old to soften the manners and temper the violence
of our nature, produced no such fruits amongst us? Is serious, and
perhaps irremediable injury, to be inflicted on reputation; and is
the sufferer thereafter to be dared to mortal combat, and this too
by the wrong-doer? Is it thus that professional justice is to be
awarded? Is it thus that knowledge is to be advanced, the dignity
of our profession to be maintained, its benefits enlarged, and
its usefulness transmitted? Is it thus that the young men are to
be taught how to acquire an unworthy and discreditable notoriety;
to disregard all the decencies, charities, and higher virtues
of life; and to bring into the exercise of our art the insidious
cunning of the knave, the vulgar dishonesty of the pilferer, and
the audacious bearing of the bravo?

I know not how others may feel on the present occasion: I am
entirely unacquainted with the parties who have been at issue in
the late suit--I have no bias of any kind, but what must arise in
the mind of every man who has any regard for the profession to
which he belongs, or who loves truth and fair dealing--I am sure
that it is not less for the interests of society at large than for
the advancement of medical science, that just principles should
regulate all our dealings, both with the public and with each
other. It is manifest that of late we have signally and woefully
departed from them; and it is most distressing to know that this
departure has been sanctioned by so many members of the profession.
I now entertain a confident hope that all who reflect on the
character of the late libel will feel that their own _character_ is
at stake if they do not mark their disapprobation of it in every
possible way. Sure I am that, if the principles which guide the
Lancet become generally acceptable, it will mark an æra of moral
degradation which no surgical dexterity, no medical acquirements,
however eminent, could possibly redeem.

  VERITAS.




DURATION OF HUMAN LIFE IN RUSSIA.


Cases of longevity are not only much more common, but also more
extraordinary in respect to a greater duration, in Russia than in
any other part of Europe; thus, from the report of the holy synod,
published in 1827, it appears that there were living in 1825, among
those who professed the Greco-Russian religion throughout the
empire, not fewer than 848 males who were 100 and more years old;
among whom, 32 had passed the age of 120, 4 were between 125 and
130, and 4 others between 130 and 135 years of age. Out of 606,881
males who died in 1826, 2785 had passed the age of 90 years; 1432
that of 95; and 818 that of 100. Among the latter, 38 were more
than 115 years of age; 24 more than 120; 7 more than 125; and one
was 160 years old at his death.




MEDICAL GAZETTE.

_Saturday, December 27, 1828._

    "Licet omnibus, licet etiam mihi, dignitatem _Artis Medicæ_
    tueri; potestas modo veniendi in publicum sit, dicendi
    periculum non recuso."--CICERO.




ANALYSIS OF WAKLEY'S DEFENCE ON THE LATE TRIAL.


We last week presented our readers with a full[20] and, we trust,
accurate account of the trial for libel, which has recently excited
so much interest; and we offered some remarks of a general nature
upon its result and tendency. We had purposed at the same time to
subject Mr. Wakley's mode of conducting his cause to a critical
investigation, but this we were prevented from doing by want of
time and space. We thought it likely, too, that the Editor of the
Lancet would have fairly met the question in his next publication,
and himself put the facts of the case, at least, on record: instead
of this, however, he has devoted his pages to compliments to
himself, and scurrilous and absurd abuse of Sir James Scarlett,
in which he informs us that in his opinion that gentleman is
"prodigiously overrated even as a lawyer," and says many other
things, which serve only to shew how dreadfully Wakley himself had
smarted under his lash.

We find the general opinion to correspond with that which we
expressed last week--that the defendant had managed his cause in
a very bungling manner; and the estimation in which he and his
witnesses were held by Judge and Jury is apparent from the charge
of the one, and decision of the other. Both, indeed, regarded the
asseverations of his whole _family party_ as dust in the balance
against the testimony of one single competent and honourable
man--Mr. Callaway; for on his evidence the result obviously hinged.
Our contemporary affects to look upon the verdict as a triumph on
his part--so he would if the damages had been five hundred or a
thousand pounds, for in truth he has nothing else for it; and with
all our hearts we wish him many such victories.

With regard to the amount of damages, we certainly should have been
better pleased had it been larger; but we did not expect that it
would--nay a reference to our number which was published while the
trial was going on, will shew that we were even doubtful of the
verdict, because we know how extremely difficult it is for a jury
to comprehend such a complicated question--how easy for a knave to
impose upon their ignorance by misrepresentation and falsehood. It
is quite obvious that if the jury had believed one syllable of the
evidence of Wakley's witnesses, they must have given the verdict
in his favour. In a case like this, where _one individual only_,
and he the plaintiff, can be fully aware of the difficulties which
had to be overcome, it is almost impossible to bring evidence
into a court of justice capable of satisfying the minds of twelve
unprofessional men. From this circumstance alone it was that we
expressed a doubtful opinion of the result. But besides all this,
it is well known to all--_that one talesman might go determined to
starve out the rest--that ten special jurymen might wish to give
500l. and yet that, by the absurd constitution of the English law,
their verdict might be thus controlled by one individual friendly
to the defendant_.

Most fortunately for the cause of truth, Wakley had the vanity and
folly to conduct the defence himself, and, judging of other men's
estimation of moral character by his own, he did not hesitate to
place in the box witnesses whom no counsel would have suffered to
go there, and who, being unable to stand the cross-examination,
led to what must have been to Wakley a most humiliating exposure.
Next to this, the most beneficial effect produced was that of
the defendant's cross-examination of his opponent's witnesses:
it was amusingly absurd, and shewed a lamentable want of tact,
always eliciting something which he ought to have avoided. Lastly
came the reply, of which he tells us he is himself ashamed--"We
may state most unfeignedly," says he, "that we look back with
regret to our errors in point of omission." Nor is this the only
part of it for which he has cause to blush, for any thing more
miserably deficient we never heard: it was a mass of confusion
throughout--a repetition of the same ideas and expressions--and a
most injudicious betrayal of rancorous feeling, at the very moment
he was profanely invoking heaven to witness that he bore enmity to
no man. In speaking of his reply in our last number, we declared
it to be "false in statement--sophistical in argument--coarse
in language--and diabolical in tendency;" and we now proceed to
illustrate these several qualifications, in doing which little more
will be necessary than to select a few passages, and arrange them
under their appropriate heads.

_False in Statement._--One of Wakley's principal objects was to
impress upon the Jury a belief that he had not in any way attempted
to influence his witnesses, nor even spoken to most of them,
anterior to the trial. "Out of nine witnesses I have placed in the
box, (says he) I never saw five of them, nor even spoke to five
of them till yesterday." We appeal to any man of common sense,
whether it be probable that this is true. It is possible indeed,
and only just possible, that he was contented with employing
others to question his witnesses, and ascertain what evidence they
would give; but even if it were so, the assertion was not the
less false in a moral point of view, because his intention was
to convey the belief that he had inquired no farther than merely
whether or not the witnesses had been present at the operation.
But incredible and absurd as this was, he ventured a step farther,
and assigned a reason for the choice made of one witness--(Lee the
potatoe-merchant.) "I had heard (said Wakley) he was present at the
operation--an honest man, and that he was a friend of Mr. Bransby
Cooper, under the highest obligation to the Cooper family. Without
asking him a single question I put him into the box, as I was most
anxious you should hear all the evidence that could be adduced, and
from _unsuspected and untainted quarters_." This lie carried with
it its own refutation; for Lee swore that he had never even spoken
to Mr. Cooper; and we are therefore amazed that Wakley should
have hazarded so gross an assertion, as it could only have been
effective on the supposition of his addressing a jury of absolute
simpletons. But again--"Who were my witnesses? not men whom I had
trained and lectured on models, and sketches, and drawings. Has
it been shewn to you that I was closeted with any person or set
of persons?" Yes, Mr. Thomas Wakley, it has been shewn, and by no
less an authority than that of your _fidus Achates_, Mr. James
Lambert. "The defendant (says the worthy author of the libel), the
defendant was there whilst I was explaining the parts to persons
who were to be witnesses--_the defendant also explained them to
the same persons_." And again, "I have heard explanations given to
persons who were to be witnesses in this cause FOUR OR FIVE TIMES
within the last six weeks." So also that excellent thorough-going
witness, Mr. Jeffry Pearl: "a _gentleman_ of the name of Lambert
introduced me to the defendant; THE DEFENDANT _and Mr. Lambert
endeavoured to shew that the forceps had passed between the bladder
and the rectum_." So much for placing men in the box because they
are friends of Mr. Cooper--so much for procuring evidence from
"untainted quarters!"

This is only to be matched in effrontery by the statement of some
wise-acre at the radical meeting on Tuesday night. Being asked why
no notice had been taken in the Lancet of a successful operation of
lithotomy performed by Mr. B. Cooper, soon after the publication
of the libel, he assigned as the reason that Mr. Wakley thought it
might increase the damages, and otherwise injure Mr. Cooper! What a
noodle the man must be to expect any one to believe him[21]!

Mr. Wakley asserted that the evidence of his witnesses remained
"untouched--wholly uncontradicted;"--whereas there was scarcely a
single point in their statements which was not contradicted either
by Mr. Callaway, who was present at the operation, or Mr. Key and
Dr. Hodgkin, who examined the parts after death. But what is more
remarkable, there was scarcely a circumstance on which his own
witnesses agreed--for example, they differed with regard to the
nature and direction of the incisions; with regard to the manner
and frequency of introducing the forceps; with regard to the number
of instruments used, and the mode of applying them; with regard to
the size of the wound; with regard to the degree of force employed,
and with regard to the appearances after death. Yet, in the face
of all this, Wakley had the impudence to tell the jury that his
evidence remained "uncontradicted." We have no hesitation in
asserting that his own witnesses (putting Mr. Cooper's out of the
question) advanced no charge of which they did not also furnish the
refutation.

Mr. Wakley asserted that Mr. Cooper was incapable of telling why
he could not extract the stone, even "while he had his finger in
the bladder." This is false: neither Mr. Cooper nor Mr. Callaway
were able to reach the bladder with the finger at all, owing to the
depth of the perineum.

Mr. Wakley told the jury that the plaintiff did not like the
bladder to be exposed, "because to surgeons there is indisputable
proof that Bransby Cooper did not perform that operation as he
ought," and that "Mr. Key and Mr. Callaway knew it." This is false:
Mr. Key, Mr. Callaway, and Dr. Hodgkin, who had examined the parts,
all deposed that there was nothing in them indicative of the
operation having been improperly performed. Indeed, had it been as
Wakley asserted, the plaintiff would not have been so foolish as to
have had the parts preserved at all.

_Sophistical in argument._--One of the pieces of sophistry on
which Wakley seems chiefly to have depended, inasmuch as he went
over it _six times_ in the course of his speech, was, that if his
account of the operation had been incorrect more of those who were
present would have been brought forward to prove it so. But, as
we stated in our last Number, to have objected to Wakley bringing
forward pupils, on the ground of their being incompetent, and then
to have done the same thing, would have been grossly inconsistent.
Lord Tenterden, in his charge, said, "he did not see whom he (Mr.
Cooper) could, with propriety, have called besides Mr. Callaway;
the others were all young men, only pupils, and probably too young
and inexperienced to form any judgment on the case that could
be relied on." There is also another person who has objected to
these witnesses whom we may mention--not, indeed, one for whose
authority we have the highest possible respect, but of whom the
defendant in this case probably thinks more favourably--we mean
Mr. Thomas Wakley, who, speaking of the Letter formerly published
by Mr. Cooper's pupils on the subject of this operation, says,
"their united opinion of the skill, dexterity, and self-possession
exhibited by Mr. Bransby Cooper on this occasion, is not likely to
influence the judgment of the profession, whatever it may effect
with the public."

The use made by Wakley of Sir Astley Cooper's expression, "give
him time," is another specimen of sophistry. Sir Astley evidently
meant merely to say that, _ceteris paribus_, a man who had been
twenty years surgeon to an Hospital would be more experienced than
one who had held the situation but one-fourth of that period.
This we believe to have been his sentiment, though nothing was
ever less happily expressed. Accordingly it was not lost upon the
defendant, who exclaimed, "Is that the way in which our hospitals
are to be conducted? Is that the mode in which your poor patients
are to be treated?--that young and inexperienced men are to be
placed there to _learn their profession_--not to know it before
they get there, but are to go there to learn it--and learn it
upon whom?--upon individuals who are as much entitled to the
best and most scientific practice of surgery as any nobleman in
this land." All very fine--but we should be glad to know how or
where a practical acquaintance with surgery is to be acquired
but in public hospitals--and if no man is to be appointed till
after he has gained experience, where are such men to come from?
Where are ready-made surgeons to be found fit to operate even
before Lambert, without his being able _to make a hole_ in their
reputation?

One of the most knavish attempts in the whole speech, to take
advantage of the jury, was exhibited in his description of the
operation. How different from the clear, perspicuous, and candid
narrative of Sir James Scarlett. You are told, says Wakley, that
the stone was shelved _above_ the pubes and _behind_ the pubes;
but, continued he, (placing a pelvis in the position in which it is
during the operation,) a stone cannot be lodged above the pubes,
because, you see, the pubes is above the bladder! This was, indeed,
calculated to confuse men unaccustomed to the subject, and who
did not probably reflect that above and below are merely relative
terms, which must change with every change of position, and that
it was not meant that the stone was between the pubes and external
integuments, which, in the position for lithotomy, would be the
literal meaning of _above the pubes_, but that it was in such a
situation as, in the ordinary position of the body, was above the
pubes. But Wakley assured the jury that it was impossible for any
stone to be _above_ the pubes, for there was a tendon to prevent it
which no force could overcome; and he affected to ridicule the idea
of there being anything unusual, any extraordinary shelf behind the
pubes, in which the stone could have been lodged. "Had there been
a shelf here," said he,--"had there been a crooked passage--had
there been a cavity, or any place for the deposition of the stone,
do you suppose that shelf would not have been produced? Had there
been any thing particular in the formation of the pubes, would they
not have cut out the man's bone as well as the bladder?" It is
probably impossible for any but medical men to appreciate fully
the impudent imposition--the fraud of this statement,--this knavish
artifice to mislead the jury. No attempt was made in any part of
Mr. Cooper's case to show that there was such malformation, or that
the stone was in the position which Mr. Wakley demonstrated it
could not occupy--_thus answering an argument which had never been
advanced_.

The following is a good specimen of sophistry and stupidity.
Finding it proved that there was no opening between the bladder
and rectum, Wakley wanted to make out that he never had said
otherwise, having stated the cellular membrane to be _lacerable_,
and therefore not _lacerated_. And then, forgetting the nature of
his argument, immediately added, "remember this; the gorget is not
as wide as the finger, and that it is not an uncommon thing for an
unskilful operator to drive the gorget in between the bladder and
rectum." Thus insinuating what had been proved to be false, and
what he had just argued, from the words of the libel, he could not
have meant.

_Coarse in language._--This scarcely requires illustration. But as
specimens, on the present occasion, of vulgar slang and miserable
attempts at wit, we may mention his talking of "hole and corner"
proceedings,--his comparing Sir James Scarlett to sour milk,
and which happy thought he has, in hand-bills pasted about the
town, converted into "Knight and Professor of Sour Milk,"--his
explanation of the term _bat_ as applied to surgeons, "because
they live in the dark, they suckle their young, and live in creaks
and crevices of old walls, hospitals, and dungeons, _thriving and
fattening on their own species_,"--his address to the "_gang_" of
hospital surgeons, whom he represented as wading "through blood
up to the neck,"--and lastly, his exclamations, several times
repeated, perhaps with _prophetic_ phrenzy, that he "would die in
a dungeon and expire in a ditch."

_Diabolical in tendency._--The general tendency of Wakley's
writings, and especially of his address to the Jury on this
occasion, so far as such ravings can have any influence, is to sow
distrust between men in every class of society and their medical
attendants; to poison the sources of public charity, and arrest
the hand of benevolence; to contract the relief afforded to human
suffering, leading the poor and uninformed to suppose themselves
the objects of cruel and wanton experiment, thus encouraging them
rather to suffer disease to run its course than seek relief in such
abodes of blood and horror as he most falsely represents our public
hospitals to be.

One of the first ebullitions of this demoniacal effort consisted
in representing to the Jury, which he did in two different parts
of his address, that the patient had been kept _bound_ during the
operation, as if some unusual degree of coercion had been employed.
"Yet, in opposition to the patient's cries--in opposition to his
repeated entreaties to be unbound, still the operator kept him upon
the table."--"Gentlemen," continued he, "I should like to know
upon what principle it was that the man was kept _bound_ upon the
table when he implored to be loosened. Was he not a free agent?"
And then he goes on to put into Mr. Cooper's mouth not only words,
but a sentiment he never uttered.--"No, no, (says the operator,)
my _reputation_ is concerned. You were brought here to have the
stone extracted, and extracted it shall and must be--_if you were
to die upon the table_." Unless Wakley was intoxicated we cannot
in any other manner account for an argument at once so absurd, so
unprofessional, and so malignant. It evidently excited no feeling
but that of disgust in the minds either of the Judge or the Jury.

The next paragraph to which we shall allude is a masterpiece
of hypocrisy--"Let me ask you (said he) what you have heard
respecting the miseries of the individual on whom the operation was
performed? Not one word has escaped the lips of the counsel on that
subject--not one word from the mouth of one of the witnesses. No,
gentlemen, they are hospital surgeons themselves, and they know too
well what the practices of our hospitals are, and the sufferings
_patients are in the habit of enduring at their hands_, to feel
for this man, or for any other man placed in a similar situation!"
Canting hypocrite! this from the man who in the very case before
us published his account of the patient's sufferings in the form
of a drama, mingled with low and scurrilous gibes. Mark also the
following--"Give such a verdict as shall satisfy the _poor_--as
will shew that men are not to go into offices of this sort where
the _poor are to be killed_, and that they shall not be at liberty
to wade and ride through blood up to their necks to eminence in
their profession. Ah! gentlemen, give such a verdict as shall
satisfy the _poor_!"

There is in the various paragraphs we have quoted, more deep-rooted
malice--more abandoned violation of the truth--more hypocrisy--and
more open outrage of common sense, decency, and feeling, than we
ever remember to have met with, even in the pages of the Lancet.
It is now quite obvious that Wakley, alarmed at the change which
has taken place in the estimation of his work within the last few
months, finds it necessary to adopt a new system; he therefore
throws off the mask, and openly declares himself the champion of
the ignorant and illiterate[22]--conjuring up to their imaginations
evils which do not exist--denouncing the medical profession as
one of blood and murder--medical men as "thriving and fattening on
their fellow-creatures"--and calling upon the "humane contributors
to our hospitals and infirmaries" to support him.

Why really now, if the times of political turbulence were to
return, and radical reform again to come into vogue, Cobbett
and Hunt would have a most valuable coadjutor; but as it is, we
almost think the sphere he has chosen is too limited for such a
genius. Humbug, to be successful, ought not to be very open to
detection; alleged abuses ought not to be of a kind which every
man can satisfy himself are entirely without foundation; and he
who professes disinterested motives ought not to begin by raising
a subscription for himself. We offer these few hints to Wakley, in
hopes they may be of use to him in his new career; above all, we
advise him to be sparing in protestations: there are some already
who look upon his sincerity with a suspicious eye; for although
it is no doubt true, that he would "rather die in a dungeon, and
expire in a ditch," than injure any man, yet somehow an idea has
got abroad, that his constant habits of lying and slandering are
not quite in keeping with these assertions. Nay, we have heard
of some even of the "humane contributors" to our charitable
institutions, who have been so unreasonable as to disbelieve all
Wakley's stories about the _cannibalism_ of hospital surgeons, and
to look upon the whole system of the Lancet as one of knavery and
imposition.




WAKLEY'S SUBSCRIPTION MEETING.


A most amusing scene took place at the Freemasons' Tavern on
Tuesday evening, of which we subjoin an account. The object of
the meeting was, "to present Mr. Wakley with some decided mark of
their approval of his spirited conduct in his late trial;" or, in
other words, if possible, to raise a little money, and bolster
up the Lancet a little longer. The persons present were small in
number, but great in zeal; and as much noise, hissing, laughter,
and shouting, took place as would have done credit to a much larger
assembly. As this is a merry season, and it may amuse our readers,
we subjoin the speeches of the principal orators on either side:
it will be perceived that both the Gazette and Lancet had some
handsome compliments paid them; and that Wakley got thoroughly
abused even by some of those who went to the meeting as the
champions of reform. There was not a single individual present of
any weight in the profession, and the chair was occupied by a young
man wholly unknown, except as secretary to the meetings held two
years ago on the subject of surgical reform. Could no one whose
name might sound familiar in the public ear be prevailed upon to
go?--could none be found but Pateys, Wallers, Mills, Elliots,
Childs, and the Lord knows who? Where was he, the idol of the
Lancet, who on other occasions graced the chair--where he who first
ycleped that Journal the "invaluable"? Alas! poor Wakley, what an
exposure of a sinking cause! even thy former friends tremble for
their reputations, and desert thee.


SURGICAL REFORM.

A meeting was held yesterday evening at the Freemasons' Tavern, in
pursuance of an advertisement calling on the "Friends of Surgical
Reform, the Supporters of a free Medical Press, and the humane
Contributors to our Hospitals and Infirmaries," to meet there,
in order to adopt measures for presenting Mr. Wakley, the Editor
of the Lancet, with some decided mark of their approval of his
spirited conduct, in his late trial in the Court of King's Bench,
at the suit of Mr. Bransby Cooper, and of the principles which he
so powerfully advocated on that occasion.

[Mr. Patey, who was called to the chair, stated the object of the
meeting; but as his speech was rather long, and contained nothing
of the least interest, we omit it.]

_Mr. Waller_, in proposing the first resolution, adverted to the
terms of the advertisement, and remarked that the question for
them was not whether they would support Cooper against Wakley, or
Wakley against Cooper; but whether they would have a free medical
press or not--(cheers). Every body must admit that there was
only one medical publication that was entitled to be considered
free--only one that dared to tell the truth. Another had been
attempted to be set up against it, but this wretched rival was
gagged and manacled, and its reports were only a medium which
distorted truth, and were almost unintelligible. It was not,
however, to support any particular man, or publication, that he
came to that meeting, but to support the general cause in which
they were all interested. He concluded by moving, as the first
resolution, that "the best interests of the medical profession and
of the public are identified with the cause of medical and surgical
reform; and that Mr. Wakley, as Editor of the Lancet, having given
the first impulse to that cause, and having subsequently advocated
it with undeviating firmness and fidelity, is entitled to the
cordial thanks and support of this meeting."

_Mr. Mills_ seconded the resolution.

_Dr. Shiel_ said this was an important meeting, in his opinion;
for, if this resolution were passed, it would identify the medical
profession with the Editor of the Lancet. If the principle
embodied in that resolution went forth to the world, it would be
attended with consequences deeply injurious to the profession.
He knew neither Mr. Bransby Cooper nor Sir Astley, and therefore
he was perfectly impartial. The first question was, how far the
medical press was conducted with advantage to medical science and
the members of the profession. Now he contended, but with great
respect, and disclaiming all personal hostility, that the Lancet
had nowise contributed to the progress of medical science or the
improvement of the profession--(loud hissing, and some cheers).
He trusted that the meeting had not been got up by a few of the
friends of Mr. Wakley, and he was sure that that gentleman was
too respectable and too dignified in his proper person to need
any such attempt--(applause). He trusted that the meeting was
before the British public to ascertain how far the Lancet was
useful or advantageous to medical science; and he hoped that,
however partial the gentlemen present might be to Mr. Wakley, they
would be governed in what they should do by the real interests of
science--(hear, hear). The question was one of great interest; for
it was one that embraced not only the freedom of the press but the
advancement of medical science. With respect to the freedom of the
press, they lived in a country where the law always maintained
that principle. When Mr. Abernethy had applied for an injunction
against the Lancet, Lord Eldon said that there could be no doubt
that the Lancet was a most useful publication--(applause). He did
not know whether that observation had been brought forward at the
late trial; but taking the case--what was it? It appeared that the
operation was one of peculiar difficulty, as stated upon oath by
some of the most experienced surgeons of the day. This operation
was laid hold of by the Lancet, and published not as a medical but
as a tragical performance, in which all persons without science
or knowledge were appealed to, and no opportunity afforded to Mr.
Cooper to vindicate himself. Here, then, was a low and pitiful
attempt made through the medium of malice and calumny (loud hisses
and uproar). Here was a rude and pitiful attempt by malice and
calumny (renewed signs of disapprobation). And yet it was contended
that this had advanced the medical profession. The evidence on the
trial went to shew that the dangers by which the operator had been
surrounded were not small, and that there was no just reason to
accuse him of unskilfulness in what he did; and was it then to be
said, in the face of the British public, that a Meeting had been
held at the Freemasons' Tavern to offer praise and reward to the
individual whose conduct had, by the verdict of the Jury, been
stamped with the accusation of untruth (hear, hear! and hisses)?
He would not deny that there was a degree of talent displayed in
the Lancet; but neither could it be denied that it was a public
depredator by means of reports surreptitiously obtained; and the
title of "literary raven," which had been applied by Sir James
Scarlett, appeared to him to truly depict its character (great
hisses and uproar). Was it to be contended that any one had a right
to come into a private lecture-room, and catch up all he could
hear, and then to publish what he had thus surreptitiously and
fraudulently obtained (immense uproar and hisses)? As far as the
medical interest was concerned, he looked upon the Lancet as one of
the most injurious publications that had ever appeared (hisses).
All the best writers on the subject had dwelt with peculiar
emphasis on the necessity of secrecy among the members of the
profession, but the Lancet broke through this good rule, and made
public whatever came within its notice; and he had no doubt that
if it could get at the cases that occurred in private practice, it
would give them without any scruple (uproar).

The _Chairman_ begged to remind the speaker that at all events Mr.
Wakley had not as yet done so.

_Dr. Shiel._--I am arguing on the principle which appears to
actuate Mr. Wakley.

_Mr. John Elliot_ rose to order. He could not allow Dr. Shiel to be
going upon suppositions; the thing that he supposed had never been
done.

_Dr. Shiel_ was sure that whatever turn might be given to the
subject in England, that at all events the conclusions that the
Meeting appeared to be coming to would be resisted abroad. The
weight of Sir Astley Cooper's name abroad would overpower any
such attempt, and, in fact, would render it contemptible; so that
any attempt to prop up so low, pitiful, and mean an attack, must
inevitably be attended with disgraceful failure (hisses).

A gentleman observed, that he was much surprised at what had fallen
from Dr. Shiel. He had been induced to suppose that the Lancet
possessed talent, as he had heard it praised in so many directions,
and he certainly had never heard till that evening that it was
only to be found in the hands of the illiterate (hear, hear! and
a laugh). He had always understood that it was only destined for
the use of students and other members of the profession, and that
it was likely to be of great use in reforming the abuses of the
medical practice (hear, hear! and cries of "So it will!"). For his
own part, he was glad that medical men were occasionally cut up,
because when they did what was wrong it was proper that they should
be told of it; and when they did what was right, it added a fresh
stimulus to their exertions (applause).

_Mr. Thomas_ observed, that he had not intended to say any thing at
the present meeting; but as Dr. Shiel, in the course of his speech,
had thought proper to make some remarks tending to calumniate Mr.
Wakley's witnesses on the trial, of which he was one, he felt
called upon to say a few words (hear, hear!). Dr. Shiel seemed to
consider them all as the mere scum of the earth--as a miserable
band, collected together to support Mr. Wakley, whatever might
be the consequence; as though he was desirous of going the whole
length of the Medical Gazette, which stigmatised them for what it
called "their deep-laid contrivances--their rankling enmities, and
their bitter revenge." For himself he could say, that it was not
till the evening previous to the trial that he had been supœnaed,
and that he had previous to that time never seen Mr. Wakley.

_Dr. Shiel_ said that he could not have alluded to the gentleman
who was speaking, as he did not even know his name.

_Mr. Thomas_ then went on to observe, that as Dr. Shiel appeared
to be the advocate of the opposite party, he also supposed that he
was a contributor to the aristocratical (Medical) Gazette ("No,
no!" from Dr. Shiel). If he were not, at all events he had put
forward ideas that were quite consonant to the sentiments expressed
in that Journal. In giving his testimony, he had not spoken of the
instruments employed in the operation, but of his own impression
on the subject, having been present thirty-five minutes; and that
impression certainly was, that the operation had been performed in
a bungling and unscientific manner (loud applause, mingled with
hisses). Was he then, because he happened to be a witness on the
occasion, to be put down, pell-mell, by the unfounded imputations
of any one? The highly-principled, honourable-minded Medical
Gazette, that had determined never to admit any personalities, had
loaded Mr. Wakley and Mr. Lambert with all sorts of abuse. Was
this what they intended to call acting on principle (applause,
and cries of "No, no!")? He certainly had heard that Mr. B.
Cooper was an amiable man in private life; but what had that
to do with the question at issue? What had they to do with the
private character of a man in a public office (cheers)? Surely the
witnesses of Mr. Wakley were as competent to speak of the manner
in which the operation was performed as those who had not been
present (applause); and as he had seen many operations performed
he conceived that he was a competent judge of the skill of the
operator (applause).

A gentleman, who appeared to be a student, thought that the
introduction of any attack upon the witnesses, or indeed of
anything that occurred at the trial, was irrelevant (hear,
hear!). The way to answer a speaker was not by hisses, but by
disproving his arguments and rebutting his facts (applause). If
questions were to be settled merely by strength of lungs, he
was afraid that instead of the right side prevailing, success
would uniformly attend those whose physical powers probably much
exceeded their mental (laughter and applause). He could not agree
with the gentleman who had stated that the law of England was
the protector of the freedom of the Press; for it was well known
that the Judges had decided, over and over again, that truth was
a libel (applause). It was only the vehicle that conveyed public
sentiment, and not the force that impelled it forward. He was
convinced that any attempt to connect medical reform with Mr.
Wakley should be studiously avoided and disclaimed. As a friend of
free discussion in every case, and anxious to uphold the principle,
whatever he might think of the instrument, he intended to propose,
as an Amendment, "That the latter part of the Resolution, relating
to Mr. Wakley, should be omitted." This would save the cause of
medical reform from being identified with Mr. Wakley, of whose
impartiality he would give a specimen. In the last number of the
Lancet, the report of the late trial was given from the Times, but
with a remarkable omission. The Lord Chief Justice had rebuked
one of the defendant's witnesses for not answering the questions
in a straightforward manner, and this passage was omitted. If Mr.
Wakley would do this on such an occasion, would he be more candid
when the public eye was less upon him? He, therefore, wished to
have the question of medical reform kept separate from Mr. Wakley
individually. The first part of the Resolution would be carried
without a dissenting voice, as on that principle they were all
agreed, whatever they might think of the conduct of individuals.

[One or two persons then made speeches for or against the
amendment; which was negatived, and the original motion carried.]

_Mr. Hensley_ then, after observing that Mr. Wakley's conduct
was highly praiseworthy, because it tended in every way to the
benefit of humanity, moved the second Resolution, which was to the
following effect:--

"That the purposes for which the Hospitals and Infirmaries of
the Metropolis were founded, and that the views of the humane
contributors to their funds, are materially promoted by the
weekly publication of reports detailing the medical and surgical
treatment of the unfortunate patients; and that Mr. Wakley having
originated the practice of publishing Hospital Reports, has
conferred important benefits on Medical Science, and on the cause
of humanity."

The resolution was then carried unanimously.

_Mr. John Elliott_, on moving the third resolution, said that he
did not come there to interfere in the quarrels of Wakley and
Cooper. They had acknowledged that Mr. Wakley's exertions had been
very conducive to medical reform, by the last resolution they
had passed. Indeed, there could be no doubt that he had greatly
served the cause of humanity, by preventing idleness on the part of
medical persons, and compelling attention to the poor placed under
their care. It was his opinion that the editor of the Lancet ought
to be indemnified for the whole expense entailed on him by the
late trial, including the damages awarded against him. This would
not be a private subscription, like Brodie's, but one open to the
world, and not to be questioned in a court of justice. He would not
support Mr. Wakley if he had attacked private character; but he
would, as the editor of the Lancet and the representative of the
medical free press. He concluded by moving--

"That the independent and impartial principles on which the Lancet
was first established, have been preserved by Mr. Wakley at all
risks; and as it was acknowledged at the late trial, that the
legal expenses of his opponents on another occasion have been
defrayed by certain hospital physicians and surgeons[23], it is
farther resolved, that a subscription be opened for the purpose of
defraying the expenses of the late action."

[Dr. Shiel here spoke very strongly against entering into a
subscription--while some spoke in its favour.]

A discussion then arose about the question of whether an account
of a second operation for lithotomy by Mr. Cooper (in which he had
been successful) had been sent to Mr. Wakley? It was stated that
such was the case, but as the action for the present libel was then
commenced, _Mr. Wakley thought that he perceived something in that
second report that might tend to aggravate the damages, and which,
at the same time, would be farther injurious to Mr. B. Cooper_.

The third resolution was then carried by an immense majority, only
five hands being held up against it.

_Mr. Evans_ moved, "That the statement of professional facts in an
unprofessional form, such as the dramatic instead of the narrative,
is highly reprehensible in the individual, and detrimental to the
best interests of science."

This resolution, after some turbulent discussion, was withdrawn.

_Mr. J. L. Stevens_ then moved, as the fourth resolution, that "In
accordance with the feelings this meeting has expressed, Mr. Wakley
be invited to attend a Public Dinner, and that a Committee be
forthwith nominated to arrange the same."

_Mr. Rogers_ seconded the resolution, and it was carried
unanimously.

The members of the committee were then named, and power given to
them to add to their number.--The chairman then vacated his office,
and the meeting separated.--_Morning Chronicle, Wednesday._


In the course of the evening, the conduct of one of the speakers
gave for a short time an amusing turn to the discussion, which for
a great part had appeared to many extremely dry and tedious. The
gentleman in question, (not a medical man), in order to show the
opinion he had entertained of the object of the meeting, proposed
to read for the audience a letter which he himself had written to
the chairman of the committee, asking permission to attend. He
began, but he had scarcely got through a few words when he declared
he was not able to make out his own writing, and requested the
chairman to assist him. The chairman made the attempt, but was not
more successful. Another gentleman then undertook the task, but
with no better effect. The audience received each unsuccessful
effort with loud laughter, which so much annoyed the writer that he
took back the letter, and again tried to go through with it, but
not being able to make it out, he proposed to read for the meeting
two letters which he wrote on the same subject to the editor of a
Sunday paper. (Loud laughter followed this proposition, which was
increased, when, on an attempt to read one of them, he had no more
success than before.) The gentleman, after complaining of the want
of courtesy in the meeting, resumed his seat, declaring that he
would give the letters to the reporters.--_Times, Wednesday._




HOSPITAL REPORTS.


GLASGOW ROYAL INFIRMARY.

_Injuries of the Head._

D. M'Millan, æt. 40, seaman;--while he was employed in the hold
of a vessel, a heavy iron block, of a round form, fell from the
rigging, a height of 20 feet, and struck him on the head. He was
knocked down and stunned, but was able to rise and to walk with
a little support. He was brought about a mile and a half in a
hackney-coach to the hospital, and admitted by Mr. Cowan at one
o'clock P.M., half an hour after the accident. At this time he
had a stupified look, but was quite collected, and was able to
walk across the ward; breathing and pupils both natural; pulse 75,
of moderate strength. There was a wound in the scalp, commencing
nearly over the centre of the sagittal suture, and running about
three inches backwards and towards the left; along this a portion
of skull, corresponding to the wound in size, was felt fractured,
detached, and irregularly depressed. His right arm was benumbed and
nearly powerless, but no mark of injury was observed on it.

It was determined to remove the detached piece of bone, and the
original wound being extended lengthwise in both directions, an
incision was made through the scalp at right angles to it over the
left parietal bone, thus bringing the fractured portion into view.
This was found to be broken down into several fragments, some of
which were firmly impacted under the surrounding cranium, and one
spiculum, driven through the dura mater, had penetrated the brain.
The trephine was applied a little to the left of the fracture, and
the intermediate part removed with Hey's saw; the detached pieces
of bone, ten in number, of various sizes and irregular shapes,
were removed with the forceps, the scalp replaced and retained in
position by a stripe of adhesive plaister and very light dressings.
During the operation one artery required ligature, and about ℥v. of
blood were lost: he had lost perhaps as much before. He remained
quite sensible, bore it well, and shortly afterwards had half a
glass of port wine in warm water.

Ten P.M.--Has been tolerably easy; complains of pain of fore-part
of head; pulse 82, firm.

    Fiat V. S. ad ℥xviii.

    Sumat statim Submur. Hydr. gr. viii. Pulv. Antimon. gr. vi.

    Applic. Capiti Lotio ex Alcohol. et aq. calcis.

Second day.--After bleeding, thought feeling of numbness of right
arm somewhat lessened, and to-day has rather more power of it.
Passed a tolerable night; a little head-ache; countenance pretty
natural; tongue slightly loaded; thirst; no stool.

    Sum. stat. Sulph. Magnesiæ ℥j. et rep. vesp. si opus.

Third day.--From an aversion to use the bed pan, he rose to stool
last night, and fell forwards on the floor, seemingly from having
entangled himself in the bed clothes; he got into bed without
assistance; had a shivering fit shortly after, but has had a pretty
good night; bowels freely opened; head-ache slight; pulse 84, soft;
tongue dry in middle. Towards the evening of this day he appeared
drowsy; and on the fourth day he is reported as seeming confused
and uneasy; countenance anxious; articulation difficult; the right
arm was more paralysed, and indeed the whole right side seemed
now to partake in the paralysis; a small part of the wound had
adhered, the remaining part was flabby, discharging thin serum.
In the evening the difficulty of articulation and drowsiness had
increased. Twelve leeches were applied to each temple, and in a
short time he seemed a little livelier.

Fifth day.--Much in the same state; took a little beef tea.

Sixth day.--Paralytic symptoms increased; breathing laborious.
Blister to the neck. It may be worthy of remark, that in the few
words he now spoke he never made use of the English language, but
of the Gaelic, which was his native tongue; and even when told that
he was not understood, he persisted in repeating the Gaelic phrase.

Seventh day.--A small fungus was observed in upper part of wound,
to which lint dipped in lime water was applied, and moderate
pressure. The fungus continued to increase.

On the eleventh and twelfth days he had slight bleedings from the
scalp, which stopped spontaneously. Stupor, &c. greatly increased,
but he still recognised his friends; took a very little chicken
soup or beef tea daily, with lemonade, &c. for drink.

On the evening of the thirteenth day bleeding to the extent of
℥iv. or v. took place from fungus: it was checked by application
of saturated solution of alum, but he sunk rapidly, and died that
night.

_Inspection 36 hours after death._--The fungus protruded
considerably beyond the scalp, and was rather larger than a hen's
egg, of a dirty brown colour, and a soft spongy consistence; it
completely filled up the opening made in the skull by the trephine
and removal of detached bone. The pericranium to the inferior side
of this opening was found detached from the bone, to the extent
of a crown piece, and beneath it the bone was rough, and covered
with thin purulent matter. The dura mater, for two inches around
the fungus, was covered with pus; this membrane, by sloughing,
had allowed the fungus to protrude, and its edges adjacent to the
aperture were thickened. On removing the dura mater, the fungus was
observed to arise, partly from the middle, but chiefly from the
posterior lobe of the left cerebral hemisphere: it occupied a space
about three inches in length, and an inch and a half in breadth,
extending to within a line or two of the roof of the ventricle;
at its anterior part was an abscess, containing ℥ss. of pus. The
fungus seemed to be a degeneration of the cerebral substance;
sections of it showed the cerebral matter first dotted with an
unusual number of bloody points, then assuming a greyish colour,
which gradually passed into a dirty brown. With the exception of
these bloody points, the brain presented no unusual vascularity:
it was quite firm, except in the immediate neighbourhood of the
fungus, where it gradually became softer as the colour of the
cerebral substance became deeper, till in the centre of the fungus
it was nearly of a broken down consistence. A quantity of serum was
found in each ventricle.


Another man who had been struck by the piece of iron which
fractured M'Millan's skull was brought up to the hospital at the
same time. He had received the blow on the vertex of his head. On
admission he was in a state of fury, requiring the efforts of
several men to hold him. His head was bruised out of all shape,
quite depressed behind, and a fracture also of the frontal bone;
there were evident symptoms too of fracture of the base of the
skull. The case was hopeless. Several large depressed and detached
pieces of bone were removed, but he died a few minutes after the
operation.


During the same week an old woman was brought up to the infirmary,
who, the day previously, had fallen headlong down a stone
staircase. She laboured under the severest symptoms of concussion,
and besides had a comminuted fracture of the humerus into the
elbow joint, and of the radius into the wrist joint of left arm.
She was past all treatment, and died on the second day. The case
is mentioned chiefly to remark, that although no external injury
of the head could be observed, on inspection a fracture was found
extending completely across the anterior part of base of cranium.


There are no dispensaries in Glasgow, but such of the poor as are
unable to obtain admission into the Royal Infirmary, and those who
are not so ill as to submit to the confinement of an hospital,
or for other reasons prefer remaining in their own houses, are
prescribed for, and, if necessary, visited at the public expense.
For this purpose the city is divided into districts, and a surgeon
appointed to each. The "district shop" thus resembles a dispensary,
where the surgeon prescribes in the presence of his pupils, who
indeed, under his superintendance, have the management of many
of the cases, both among the patients who receive advice at the
"shop," and those who are visited at home. Although under the care
of a surgeon, the diseases treated are both medical and surgical,
for there is little distinction made between the two branches of
the profession here.

The following case occurred under the care of Mr. Stirling:--

W. M. æt. 28, while returning home during the night in a state
of intoxication, fell from a height of ten feet, into a court
paved with stone. He was rendered insensible for some time, but
on recovering was able to crawl to the nearest door, and was
conveyed home. Medical assistance was immediately procured. On
the forehead, about an inch above the nasal process of the frontal
bone, was a cut an inch and a half in length, extending obliquely
downwards from the right side; through this a triangular fracture
was felt, the base of which was in the direction of the external
wound, and the apex pointing downwards; the fractured portion
of the bone was slightly depressed; the bones of the nose were
also fractured, and there was great discharge of blood from the
nostrils. One third, or nearly, of the upper lip was cut off, and a
good deal of blood had been lost from the labial artery; the lower
jaw at the symphysis was fractured and comminuted, and several
pieces were perceived to be loose. Was quite sensible, remembering
every thing up to the period of the accident. Pulse 80; has vomited
frequently. Wound of forehead was dressed with adhesive plaister;
the loose pieces of bone were removed from the lower jaw, and it
was afterwards retained in juxta-position by a chin bandage.

Early next morning he was bled to ℥xii. and had a purge of jalap
and calomel, by which his bowels were freely opened. That night he
felt considerable pain of head; pulse 90, full, and strong. He was
bled again to ℥xxv. Blood first drawn had the buffy coat. After
the bleeding the pain of head diminished, and he continued to do
well. When the swelling and tenderness of face had subsided, it was
observed that the fracture communicated with the frontal sinus. On
holding his nose and attempting to blow it, matter and air escaped
by the fracture. The man was anxious for a speedy cure, and for
this purpose an operation to remove the depressed piece of bone was
at one time thought of; there was no constitutional disturbance,
however, and the case was left to nature. The discharge gradually
diminished, and the wound healed up in about a month. The bones
of the nose retained their position, and the broken ends of the
jaw, after the swelling had subsided, were kept in their proper
situation by a pasteboard splint till re-union took place. The lip
also healed easily, and no deformity is now observable.


GUY'S HOSPITAL.

_Inflammation of Hernial Sac._

The previous report of this case (Gazette, No. 51) conducted it to
Nov. 18th, the tenth day from the operation, and the third on which
fæces had been discharged from the wound; that discharge continued
on the 19th, but on the 20th pus only was seen.

Nov. 22.--Yesterday the dresser, Mr. King, observed a portion of
_solid_ fæces make its escape, and to-day a similar discharge, in
the fluid form, is manifest.

Nov. 26.--Since the 22d, nothing but healthy pus has been seen; the
wound is rapidly healing, and the patient's general condition as
good as can be desired.

Dec. 4.--He has begun to wear a truss, and is to-day allowed to
leave his bed.

Dec. 8.--As regards his original complaint, the man is perfectly
convalescent, but he now discloses a small abscess in the scrotum,
which has been gradually forming, and will detain him in the house
some time longer.

If it be a sound surgical maxim that, in strangulated hernia,
the patient's safety depends upon an early operation, it is also
a maxim no less sound, that where the evidence and symptoms of
strangulation are imperfect, or dubious, the benefit of the doubt
should be given to the operation, and it should be performed: for
it is better that buboes should be laid open, or inflamed sacs cut
into, twenty, aye, fifty times in succession, than that in one case
a man should be suffered to die with strangulation of the intestine
unrelieved.

These remarks apply strikingly to this case of Mr. Key's, in which,
although no hernia was found, they perfectly justify the operation.
No case of strangulation could be more distinctly marked, or
more clearly call for the knife, than did this; and had Mr. Key
refused to use it, he would have deserved the scoff which, by a
contemporary, has so preposterously been thrown on the "no hernia
case." But, more than this, the operation was not only justifiable,
but beyond a doubt _beneficial_--beneficial inasmuch as it at
once relieved the distress of the patient, secured him from more
extensive suppuration, from farther sloughing of intestine, and
probably from extravasation of fæces into the abdomen; rendering
also the process of reparation more easy and rapid.


_Hereditary Hare-Lip._

Dec. 4th, Mr. Key performed the operation for hare-lip on a child
a few months old, whose case was remarkable only as it afforded an
instance of _hereditary_ malformation. The father of the child had
congenital hare-lip, for which no operation had been performed, and
of his six children _two_ were born with the same malformation.

_Queries._--1. If the father's lip had, in his infancy, been
restored to the natural form, would the malformation in that case
have descended to his children?

2. Is the casualty in these cases to be traced _directly_ from
the father to the incipient embryo, or _indirectly_, through the
medium of the mother's imagination--It has been said that paternal
resemblances are produced in the latter mode.

  G.


PARIS HOSPITALS.

_Hôtel Dieu._

_Cases of Gangrene of the Lungs._

Some interesting cases of gangrenous suppuration of the lungs were
published by Dr. Chambers, about eighteen months ago, in which he
particularly pointed out the horrible fœtor of the breath as a
diagnostic mark of the disease. The following cases which recently
occurred at the Hôtel Dieu are good illustrations of more extensive
destruction of the lung by a similar disease.

CASE I.--A man, aged 32, of good constitution, laboured under
bronchitis for some weeks, to which he paid little attention,
when he was suddenly seized with pain in left side, dyspnœa,
considerable cough, and a rigor, followed by fever. He was admitted
into the Hôtel Dieu next day. Crepitation was perceptible over the
whole extent of the left lung, posteriorly, and reaching to the
site of the pain in the side, which was increased by percussion;
great oppression, with frequent cough, and expectoration of
violet-red colour, mixed with mucus; pulse frequent and small;
constant chilliness; cheeks flushed.

Next day the symptoms remained unabated, and _fœtor of the breath_
was observed. Two days after it is stated that the expectoration
maintained the same appearance, but _was now fœtid_; the breath
was, however, still more offensive, and during the fits of coughing
particularly so. In the evening the breath is said to have become
_gangrenous_.

21.--The cough was small, difficult, and painful, producing an
expectoration of violet-coloured matter, approaching to chocolate,
_with a characteristic odour_.

22 to 25.--Expectoration and breath emit an _intolerable stench_.
On the latter day the patient died.

_Examination._--The body not emaciated. Strong adhesions of the
left lung to pleura costalis. At its posterior part a large
gangrenous layer, occupying the two superior thirds of the lung,
covered at some points by a false membrane. The lower third, and
the parts round the gangrenous portion, in different degrees of
inflammation, and hepatised; the putrid mass was in great part
black or violet-coloured, containing fragments of the pulmonary
texture; the smell gangrenous, but less so than that of the breath
during life; pus might be squeezed from the adjacent part of the
lung.

CASE II.--A man, aged 55, enjoyed good health till the beginning
of May, at which time he experienced pain in the left side of
the thorax after exposure to cold. During the next few days the
cough was frequent, and the expectoration tinged with blood. A
rigor now came on, followed by a distinct exacerbation of fever,
and he came to the Hôtel Dieu. At this time he presented symptoms
of inflammation of the lungs, and was bled with relief; he left
the hospital in twelve days, being sufficiently well to resume
his occupation. Scarcely had he done this, however, when he had a
relapse, accompanied by great lassitude, oppression of breathing,
and frequent cough. At the end of a week he returned. He was now at
the twenty-first day of the attack. His skin was yellowish; face
pale or of leaden hue, and greatly altered; his cough frequent,
with abundant expectoration of matter like chocolate, with small
specks resembling pus, and little bodies about the size of peas,
which appeared to be portions of the lung. This putrid mass exhaled
a _gangrenous odour_, and the expired air was impregnated in a
high degree with an equally disgusting smell, which surrounded the
patient's bed with a contaminated atmosphere. Percussion gave a
clear sound over the whole extent of the chest; auscultation did
not discover the pulmonary expansion on the right side. The pulse
was weak, but not frequent; the patient was in a state of extreme
prostration. Next day the odour of the breath and expectoration
was, if possible, more dreadful. He lingered two days longer,
during which time the fœtid smell somewhat diminished, and the
proportion of pus in the expectoration increased.

_Examination._--The left lung had contracted firm adhesions,
particularly above and behind. It was torn in attempting to
remove it, and there issued from the middle and posterior part a
large quantity of dark-coloured matter, similar to what had been
expectorated. An incision was made along the back part of the
lung, and laid open a large cavity, occupying all the extent of
the pulmonary organ, and still in part filled with the same kind
of dark putrid matter. On washing out the cavity it was perceived
that it was lined with a smooth and white membrane, to which were
still adherent, at some points, dark filamentous shreds; these
were removed by the least touch, and left the surface smooth
beneath. The boundary was formed by a false membrane, about a line
in thickness, which separated the mortified from the sound parts.
The lung was reduced to a kind of bag, the parietes of which were
on an average about an inch thick. In the upper part of the lung,
which was hepatized, an incision discovered a number of smaller
tubercles, which in the centre were in a crude state; and at one
point several had suppurated, forming a cavity large enough to
contain a nut.

[The Editors of the _Journal Hebdomadaire_, from which these cases
are abridged, add, in a note, that although the fœtor of the
expectoration, such as above described, is usually dependent on
gangrene of the lungs, yet that this is not invariably the case.
In confirmation of this assertion they refer to three instances
of fœtid expectoration--in the first, the patient is still alive;
in the second, there was chronic bronchitis, with considerable
dilatation of numerous bronchi; and in the third, bronchitis with
some appearances of chronic pneumonia. Laënnec gives a case of
dilatation of the bronchi, with remarkably fœtid expectoration.
The argument derived from the first patient having survived we
consider to be altogether erroneous, as patients more frequently
recover from this than other forms of purulent expectoration.--ED.]




PROCEEDINGS OF SOCIETIES.


WESTMINSTER MEDICAL SOCIETY.

December 6th, 1828.

JAMES ARNOTT, ESQ. IN THE CHAIR.

Pursuant to announcement, Mr. MacKelcan introduced the subject of
concussion of the brain. After remarking on the several symptoms,
and mentioning the other affections of the head with which
concussion is apt to be confounded, Mr. M. directed the attention
of the society more particularly to the treatment in the stage of
collapse, adopted by Professor Andrini of Florence.

Dr. Duffin stated, that having been in Florence, he had witnessed
the employment of three, four, or six ounce bleedings employed
by the Professor in the stage above-mentioned. The principle on
which they were used was that of their acting as a stimulus to the
brain; and really the plan was not apparently attended with any bad
effects. When re-action has ensued, the practice of M. Andrini is
the same as that resorted to in this country.

The discussion then wavered between apoplexy and concussion, and
ended by some good-humoured sparring between Dr. Addison and Mr.
Gilbert Burnett, on the capability of the brain containing more
blood at one time than another.

The President announced from the chair that a special meeting would
take place on Friday evening, December 12, at 7 P.M.


December 20th, 1828.

CÆSAR HAWKINS, ESQ. IN THE CHAIR.

After some business had been dispatched, to which we shall allude
in another place, Mr. Jewel related the particulars of a case of
"supposed extra-uterine fœtation." The case, which is one of much
interest, is as follows:--

Mrs. F. a robust, healthy woman, ætatis 27, had been married one
year, and aborted once; when, in the month of September 1827,
she quitted her husband in London, and accepted a situation in
the country. After the expiration of a few weeks she received
permission to come to London for a day; and, naturally enough,
passed that night, (November 8th), with her husband, returning
again to the country next morning. Soon afterwards, the
morning-sickness, heart-burn, and other sympathetic affections
of pregnancy, appeared; but the catamenia still returned at the
regular periods, though scanty and paler in colour than natural.
She now quitted her situation, returned to her husband, and
engaged a midwife to attend her in her expected confinement. The
circumstance of quickening occurred in the latter part of February,
and was accompanied by a severe paroxysm of fainting, whilst the
abdomen gradually enlarged, and the motions of the child (as was
imagined) could not only be easily detected with the hand, but were
visible to the eye. On the 9th of August, making a period of 274
days, she was seized with the usual premonitory symptoms of labour;
the midwife arrived; found her walking her chamber, and concluded
that the process had considerably advanced. Three distinct uterine
contractions took place subsequent to the midwife's arrival, the
last of which was so severe as to compel the patient to grasp
firmly the back of a chair, and induce, after its subsidence,
excessive faintness. From this time no further parturient effort
was made; no examination per vaginam was instituted; neither was
there noticed any sanguineous vaginal discharge. When Mr. Jewel saw
her, examination detected nothing unusual in the os uteri, and the
symptoms she presents are these. The abdomen is about the size of a
woman's in the sixth or seventh month of pregnancy, the enlargement
being general. Her general health is much disturbed: she complains
of pain in the left hypogastric region, particularly when the
abdomen is compressed by the hand or stays--and she also complains
of weight in the abdomen, especially on leaning forwards. The woman
herself has a strong prepossession that "something is to come
away," or that she might be relieved by an operation. The woman
believes that she still feels the motions of the child, though
feebly.

Having read this case, Mr. Jewel concluded by offering some
observations on the subject of extra-uterine fœtation. He
considered this as probably an instance of "graviditus
abdominalis," and remarked that the uterus not having expelled its
dezidua, was no conclusive proof to the contrary, Dr. Blundell and
Mr. Langstaff having examined cases where this was wanting.

Dr. Locock never saw a case where laceration occurred in the
early months of pregnancy. Dr. L. remembered the particulars
of a case where the uterus was lacerated in the fourth month,
and the ovum escaped into the cavity of the abdomen, and the
symptoms of pregnancy were exceedingly strong. Dr. Locock almost
doubted whether Mr. Jewel's was an instance of pregnancy at all,
for frequently women enjoying sexual intercourse have enlarged
abdomens, and many of the other symptoms of pregnancy, which a few
doses of purgative medicine will remove.

Two remarkable instances of extra-uterine fœtation were related
by Mr. Burnett and Mr. Cæsar Hawkins; and towards the conclusion
of the evening the discussion turned on the powers of the ergot
of rye. Dr. Locock had frequently tried it in amenorrhœa, and, on
the whole, without any very good effects. In one remarkable case,
where the lady particularly wished to have children, Dr. Locock
having boiled an ounce of the ergot in a pint of water down to half
a pint, gave an ounce and a half of this decoction three times a
day. After the young lady had taken about half a pint, the most
violent convulsions succeeded, which placed her life in imminent
hazard, and from which it was long before she completely recovered.
She menstruated twice after that, but then the discharge again was
arrested, and has never since returned, nor has she become pregnant.

The practice of "bougieing the uterus" in cases of dysmenorrhœa
was brought upon the tapis, and excited a good deal of laughter,
the members appearing to consider the proposal ridiculous in the
extreme.


MR. LAMBERT.

At the last meeting of this Society it was proposed, on the
recommendation of the Committee, that Mr. James Lambert should be
expelled; and after some discussion it was agreed that the sense
of the members should be taken by ballot at the next meeting,
Saturday, January 3, 1829. It was thought that proceeding at
once to his expulsion might give the appearance of the measure
originating with a party, and that the delay would enable the
deliberate judgment of the whole Society to be passed upon his
conduct.


HUNTERIAN SOCIETY.

Dec. 10, 1828.

DR. BILLING, PRESIDENT, IN THE CHAIR.

Mr. Leese, Jun. exhibited to the meeting a specimen of medullary
sarcoma, taken from the forehead of a man after death, with a
portion of the os frontis. The man was fifty-eight years of
age, long asthmatic, and appeared to die of hydrothorax. He
never suffered any pain in the tumor, but expressed a sense of
distention. It was immoveable at the base, and there were some
fissures in the os frontis, from caries. The dura mater at the
corresponding part adhered firmly to cranium, and on its being
removed some spiculæ from the carius inner table remained adhered
to it. There had never been any symptoms of cerebral affection. A
tumor of the same nature had formed on the scapular extremity of
the clavicle, and had occasioned anasarca of the limb.

Mr. Key supposed that the tumor had originated from the diplöe,
and believed that the only chance of relief in such a case
would be trephining; but he acknowledged that there was little
encouragement to operate in these cases, owing to the tendency of
the disease to return in some other part. He related an instance
of the true medullary fungus taking its origin from the cancellous
structure of the os femoris. The limb was removed, but the patient
died. A circle of fungoid glands was observed at the base of the
heart, and some of the bronchial glands were in the same condition.

Dr. Conquest expressed his belief that carcinoma was always a
constitutional affection, and stated that at least in nine cases of
cancer uteri out of ten, there was carcinomatous affection of the
pylorus, mesenteric glands, or liver.

Mr. Key and Dr. F. Ramsbotham had not observed, in their
examinations, the coincidence noticed by Dr. Conquest.

The remainder of the evening was occupied by a discussion on the
different kinds of ulceration that occur about the os and cervix
uteri, and the circumstances under which the removal of the uterus,
or the amputation of the cervix, may be warrantable.

Dr. Babington adverted to the occasional existence of a family
disposition to carcinoma. He had known three sisters successively
die of cancer in the breast.


MEDICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON.

Dec. 13th and 20th, 1828.

DR. HASLAM IN THE CHAIR.

The subject of discussion, at the first of these meetings, was
stricture of the rectum, when the diagnosis and treatment of
carcinoma of that part came under consideration. There was a
remarkable discrepancy in the opinions of Messrs. Lloyd and Salmon
as to the symptoms and management of carcinomatous affections of
the rectum. Mr. Lloyd maintained that these affections of the
intestine were sometimes attended with pain and sometimes not, and
that the patients were often materially benefited by the use of
bougies; while Mr. Salmon affirmed, that the disease was always
painful, and not to be mitigated by the employment of these means.

A variety of subjects came before the society at the next meeting.
The president read a letter from Mr. Wansborough, of Fulham,
describing the "original stomach-pump," a specimen of which
accompanied the letter: the instrument Mr. W. stated to be of 25
years' standing.

Mr. Shearly exhibited, among other morbid specimens, a uterus,
on the external surface of which the disease termed the "white
tubercle" was in progress: there was also a small polypus near the
os uteri. Mr. Pereira exhibited to the society a fine specimen of
medullary sarcoma of the liver. The organ was so enlarged as to
have occupied two-thirds of the abdomen. The other viscera were not
involved in the disease. The progress of the disease, as far as
it could be ascertained, was excellently detailed by Mr. Smith, a
visitor. The symptoms were obscure.

Mr. Armstrong read an extract of a letter from Mr. Morgan, of
the Bristol Infirmary, a corresponding member of the Society,
describing a curious conformation of the œsophagus in a child,
which lived 106 hours only, during which period every attempt to
swallow food produced considerable distress. The œsophagus was
found to be divided into two portions; the upper or pharyngæal
extremity terminating in a _cul de sac_ behind the bifurcation of
the trachea; and the lower or ventricular extremity arising from
the trachea at this point, between the bronchi, proceeding down the
spine, and terminating, as usual, at the cardiac orifice of the
stomach. Mr. Drysdale mentioned a somewhat similar malformation
occurring in two children in one family. Mr. Callaway related a
case of concussion of the brain, which terminated fatally, after
the restoration of the intellectual functions. The whole of the
anterior lobes of each hemisphere of the brain was broken down, and
mixed with effused blood. The remarkable feature of the case was,
the return of consciousness, and the possession of this power for
six days, under the disorganization of the brain described; and the
questions particularly agitated were, Did this extent of mischief
exist immediately after the concussion? What was the degree of
laceration of the brain at that period? and, How could the recovery
of the intellectual faculty be reconciled with so much injury of
the brain?

The Society then adjourned to the 12th of January, 1829.




COOPER _v._ WAKLEY.


Notes of the Cause, Cooper _v._ Wakley--We understand that Mr.
Cooper is about to publish a verbatim account of the above trial,
from Mr. Gurney's short-hand notes.




ERRATA.


The Advertisement of Mr. B. Cooper's, in our last Number, ought
to have been dated "_December_ 15," instead of "_Oct._ 15." Also,
for "_Mr. Elton_," the name of one of Mr. Cooper's witnesses, read
"_Mr. Hilton_."

In our last leading article, _for_ "can no friend of Wakley be
named?" _read_ "can the name of no friend of Wakley be mentioned?"
The alteration is necessary, to connect it with the conclusion of
the paragraph.


W. WILSON, Printer, 57, Skinner-Street, London.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] General thickening of all the valvular apparatus on both sides
of the heart. (St. B. 33.)

[2] Andral, vol. iii. p. 411.

[3] Pl. 1, fig. 5.

[4] Opacity and thickening of the lining membrane on both sides of
the heart, without unevenness or alteration of form. (St. B. 33).

Opacity and thickening in the valvular apparatus between the left
auricle and ventricle, with shortening of the chordæ tendinæ, and
such alteration of structure and form as to produce a considerable
contraction of the aperture. (St. B. 26).

Such thickening of the whole valvular apparatus as to narrow the
aperture of communication between the left auricle and ventricle to
a mere slit. (St. B. 19).

Shrivelled and contracted state of the semilunar valves, in which a
cartilaginous substance has entirely taken the place of the natural
structure. (Hodgson, pl. 1, fig. 6).

[5] Osteum aortæ almost closed by ossified valves. (St. B. 15);
(Hodgson, pl. 1, fig. 2).

[6] Fungus growing from the aortic valves, which are thickened and
shortened. (St. B. 6, 20).

Fungus form the aortic valves, which are ulcerated. (St. B. 21).

Larger specimens of fungus, growing from the ulcerated edges of two
of the valves of the aorta. (Hodgson, pl. 1, fig. 7).

[7] Dr. Baillie's plate.

[8] Polypous coagulum in the ventricle. (Coll. of Phys. 4, A. 16).

Coagulum firmly attached to the lining of the left auricle, with
enlargement of its capacity. (St. B. 19).

[9] (St. B. 13).

[10] It occurs sometimes in the uterus.

[11] Memoir. de l'Acad. des Sciences. Morand, 1732. Morgagni,
Epist. 27.

[12] Andral, v. 3, 466; Hodgson, plate 1, figure 7; St. B. 14.

[13] Corvisart, cap. 4. sect. 1.

[14] Active dilatation of the left ventricle. (College of Phys. 4,
c. 10.)

The thickened walls of the left strikingly contrasted with the
attenuated walls of the right ventricle. (St. B. 9).

Active dilatation of the left ventricle. Its capacity is strikingly
contrasted with that of the right. (College of Phys. 4, c. 11.)

Passive dilatation of both ventricles, especially of the right.
(St. B. 10).

[15] Morgagni, Epist. xxvii. 7.

[16] Ibid. 2.

[17] Ibid. 3.

Rupture of the left ventricle, with attenuation of its muscular
structure. (St. B. 18).

Rupture, without attenuation, but with softening and looseness of
texture in the muscular substance. (St. B. 22).

[18] Harvey, Exercit. altera.

[19] Rupture of the left ventricle without change in its structure.
Bone deposited at the commencement of the aorta. (St. B. 27).

In turning over the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences, I
find two cases of rupture of the heart, reported by M. Morand. They
both occurred in the year 1730; and, strange to say, one was that
of a Duchess of Brunswick, who was of the same family as George II.
who also died of a ruptured heart. In the one, that of the Duchess,
there was a manifest ulceration through the walls of the right
ventricle, its structure being otherwise unimpaired; in the other,
where the aperture was in the left ventricle, there was probably
a simple rupture, for the flesh of the heart was so soft that the
point of a probe would pass through it wherever it was rested.
(Mem. de l'Acad. Roy. des Sciences, Ann. 1732).

[20] The trial as published in the Lancet occupied less than 21
pages--in the Gazette it extended, in the same type, to 33 pages
and a half. In the Lancet, those parts, both of the evidence and
speeches, which told most against Wakley, were omitted.

[21] See passage in Italics, page 137.

[22] The defendant, on leaving the court, was cheered by the
populace in Palace Yard.--Lancet, Dec. 20.

[23] This we believe is false; nothing of the kind either occurred,
or was stated at the trial.--E. G.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg 116, 'immedate contact' replaced by 'immediate contact'.
  Pg 119, 'and attennuation in' replaced by 'and attenuation in'.
  Pg 126, 'Tue valuable paper' replaced by 'The valuable paper'.
  Pg 132, 'probably impossibly' replaced by 'probably impossible'.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The London Medical Gazette; December
27, 1828, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON MEDICAL GAZETTE, DEC 27, 1828 ***

***** This file should be named 53450-0.txt or 53450-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/4/5/53450/

Produced by John Campbell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Kong Ho, by Ernest Bramah

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mirror of Kong Ho

Author: Ernest Bramah

Posting Date: July 26, 2008 [EBook #1077]
Release Date: October 1997
Last Updated: October 18, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF KONG HO ***




Produced by John Bickers





THE MIRROR OF KONG HO

By Ernest Bramah



     A lively and amusing collection of letters on western living
     written by Kong Ho, a Chinese gentleman. These addressed to
     his homeland, refer to the Westerners in London as
     barbarians and many of the aids to life in our society give
     Kong Ho endless food for thought. These are things such as
     the motor car and the piano; unknown in China at this time.




INTRODUCTION

ESTIMABLE BARBARIAN,--Your opportune suggestion that I should permit the
letters, wherein I have described with undeviating fidelity the customs
and manner of behaving of your accomplished race, to be set forth in
the form of printed leaves for all to behold, is doubtless
gracefully-intentioned, and this person will raise no barrier of dissent
against it.

In this he is inspired by the benevolent hope that his immature
compositions may to one extent become a model and a by-word to those who
in turn visit his own land of Fragrant Purity; for with exacting care
he has set down no detail that has not come under his direct observation
(although it is not to be denied that here or there he may, perchance,
have misunderstood an involved allusion or failed to grasp the inner
significance of an act), so that Impartiality necessarily sways his
brush, and Truth lurks within his inkpot.

In an entirely contrary manner some, who of recent years have gratified
us with their magnanimous presence, have returned to their own countries
not only with the internal fittings of many of our palaces (which,
being for the most part of a replaceable nature, need be only trivially
referred to, the incident, indeed, being generally regarded as a most
cordial and pressing variety of foreign politeness), but also--in
the lack of highly-spiced actuality--with subtly-imagined and truly
objectionable instances. These calumnies they have not hesitated to
commit to the form of printed books, which, falling into the hands
of the ignorant and undiscriminating, may even suggest to their
ill-balanced minds a doubt whether we of the Celestial Empire really are
the wisest, bravest, purest, and most enlightened people in existence.

As a parting, it only remains to be said that, in order to maintain
unimpaired the quaint-sounding brevity and archaic construction of your
prepossessing language, I have engraved most of the remarks upon the
receptive tablets of my mind as they were uttered. To one who can repeat
the Five Classics without stumbling this is a contemptible achievement.
Let it be an imposed obligation, therefore, that you retain these
portions unchanged as a test and a proof to all who may read. Of my
own deficient words, I can only in truest courtesy maintain that any
alteration must of necessity make them less offensively commonplace than
at present they are.

The Sign and immutable Thumb-mark of, Kong Ho

By a sure hand to the House of one Ernest Bramah.




THE MIRROR OF KONG HO




LETTER I


 Concerning the journey. The unlawful demons invoked by
 certain of the barbarians; their power and the manner of
 their suppression. Suppression. The incredible obtuseness of
 those who attend within tea-houses. The harmonious attitude
 of a person of commerce.


VENERATED SIRE (at whose virtuous and well-established feet an unworthy
son now prostrates himself in spirit repeatedly),--

Having at length reached the summit of my journey, that London of which
the merchants from Canton spoke so many strange and incredible things, I
now send you filial salutations three times increased, and in accordance
with your explicit command I shall write all things to you with an
unvarnished brush, well assured that your versatile object in committing
me to so questionable an enterprise was, above all, to learn the
truth of these matters in an undeviating and yet open-headed spirit of
accuracy and toleration.

Of the perils incurred while travelling in the awe-inspiring devices by
which I was transferred from shore to shore and yet further inland,
of the utter absence of all leisurely dignity on the part of
those controlling their movements, and of the almost unnatural
self-opinionatedness which led them to persist in starting at a stated
and prearranged time, even when this person had courteously pointed
out to them by irrefutable omens that neither the day nor the hour was
suitable for the venture, I have already written. It is enough to assert
that a similar want of prudence was maintained on every occasion, and,
as a result, when actually within sight of the walls of this city, we
were involved for upwards of an hour in a very evilly-arranged yellow
darkness, which, had we but delayed for a day, as I strenuously advised
those in authority after consulting the Sacred Flat and Round Sticks, we
should certainly have avoided.

Concerning the real nature of the devices by which the ships are
propelled at sea and the carriages on land, I must still unroll a blank
mind until I can secretly, and without undue hazard, examine them more
closely. If, as you maintain, it is the work of captive demons hidden
away among their most inside parts, it must be admitted that these
usually intractable beings are admirably trained and controlled, and
I am wide-headed enough to think that in this respect we
might--not-withstanding our nine thousand years of civilised
refinement--learn something of the methods of these barbarians. The
secret, however, is jealously guarded, and they deny the existence of
any supernatural forces; but their protests may be ignored, for there
is undoubtedly a powerful demon used in a similar way by some of the
boldest of them, although its employment is unlawful. A certain kind of
chariot is used for the occupation of this demon, and those who wish
to invoke it conceal their faces within masks of terrifying design, and
cover their hands and bodies with specially prepared garments, without
which it would be fatal to encounter these very powerful spirits.
While yet among the habitations of men, and in crowded places, they are
constrained to use less powerful demons, which are lawful, but when
they reach the unfrequented paths they throw aside all restraint, and,
calling to their aid the forbidden spirit (which they do by secret
movements of the hands), they are carried forward by its agency at a
speed unattainable by merely human means. By day the demon looks forth
from three white eyes, which at night have a penetrating brilliance
equal to the fiercest glances of the Sacred Dragon in anger. If any
person incautiously stands in its way it utters a warning cry of
intolerable rage, and should the presumptuous one neglect to escape to
the roadside and there prostrate himself reverentially before it, it
seizes him by the body part and contemptuously hurls him bruised and
unrecognisable into the boundless space of the around. Frequently
the demon causes the chariot to rise into the air, and it is credibly
asserted by discriminating witnesses (although this person only sets
down as incapable of denial that which he has actually beheld) that
some have maintained an unceasing flight through the middle air for a
distance of many li. Occasionally the captive demon escapes from the
bondage of those who have invoked it, through some incautious gesture
or heretical remark on their part, and then it never fails to use them
grievously, casting them to the ground wounded, consuming the chariot
with fire, and passing away in the midst of an exceedingly debased
odour, by which it is always accompanied after the manner of our own
earth spirits.

This being, as this person has already set forth, an unlawful demon on
account of its power when once called up, and the admitted uncertainty
of its movements, those in authority maintain a stern and inexorable
face towards the practice. To entrap the unwary certain persons (chosen
on account of their massive outlines, and further protected from evil
influences by their pure and consistent habits) keep an unceasing watch.
When one of them, himself lying concealed, detects the approach of such
a being, he closely observes the position of the sun, and signals to
the other a message of warning. Then the second one, shielded by the
sanctity of his life and rendered inviolable by the nature of his
garments--his sandals alone being capable of overturning any demon from
his path should it encounter them--boldly steps forth into the road and
holds out before him certain sacred emblems. So powerful are these
that at the sight the unlawful demon confesses itself vanquished, and
although its whole body trembles with ill-contained rage, and the air
around is poisoned by its discreditable exhalation, it is devoid of
further resistance. Those in the chariot are thereupon commanded to
dismiss it, and being bound in chains they are led into the presence of
certain lesser mandarins who administer justice from a raised dais.

“Behold!” exclaims the chief of the captors, when the prisoners have
been placed in obsequious attitudes before the lesser mandarins, “thus
the matter chanced: The honourable Wang, although disguised under the
semblance of an applewoman, had discreetly concealed himself by the
roadside, all but his head being underneath a stream of stagnant water,
when, at the eighth hour of the morning, he beheld these repulsive
outcasts approaching in their chariot, carried forward by the diabolical
vigour of the unlawful demon. Although I had stationed myself several li
distant from the accomplished Wang, the chariot reached me in less than
a breathing space of time, those inside assuming their fiercest and most
aggressive attitudes, and as they came repeatedly urging the demon to
increased exertions. Their speed exceeded that of the swallow in
his hymeneal flight, all shrubs and flowers by the wayside withered
incapably at the demon’s contaminating glance, running water ceased
to flow, and the road itself was scorched at their passage, the earth
emitting a dull bluish flame. These facts, and the times and the
distances, this person has further inscribed in a book which thus
disposes of all possible defence. Therefore, O lesser mandarins, let
justice be accomplished heavily and without delay; for, as the proverb
truly says, ‘The fiercer the flame the more useless the struggles of the
victim.’”

At this point the prisoners frequently endeavour to make themselves
heard, protesting that in the distance between the concealed Wang and
the one who stands accusing them they had thrice stopped to repair their
innermost details, had leisurely partaken of food and wine, and had
also been overtaken, struck, and delayed by a funeral procession. But so
great is the execration in which these persons are held, that although
murderers by stealth, outlaws, snatchers from the body, and companies of
men who by strategy make a smaller sum of money appear to be larger, can
all freely testify their innocence, raisers of this unlawful demon
must not do so, and they are beaten on the head with chains until they
desist.

Then the lesser mandarins, raising their voices in unison, exclaim,
“The amiable Tsay-hi has reported the matter in a discreet and impartial
spirit. Hear our pronouncement: These raisers of illegal spirits
shall each contribute ten taels of gold, which shall be expended in
joss-sticks, in purifying the road which they have scorched, and in
alleviating the distress of the poor and virtuous of both sexes. The
praiseworthy Tsay-hi, moreover, shall embroider upon his sleeve an
honourable sign in remembrance of the event. Let drums now be beat, and
our verdict loudly proclaimed throughout the province.”

These things, O my illustrious father (although on account of my
contemptible deficiencies of style much may seem improbable to your
all-knowing mind), these things I write with an unbending brush; for
I set down only that which I have myself seen, or read in their own
printed records. Doubtless it will occur to one of your preternatural
intelligence that our own system of administering justice, whereby the
person who can hire the greater number of witnesses is reasonably held
to be in the right, although perhaps not absolutely infallible, is in
every way more convenient; but, as it is well said, “To the blind, night
is as acceptable as day.”

Henceforth you will have no hesitation in letting it be known throughout
Yuen-ping that these foreign barbarians do possess secret demons, in
spite of their denials. Doubtless I shall presently discover others no
less powerful.

With honourable distinction this person has at length grasped the
essential details of the spoken language here--not sufficiently well,
indeed, to make himself understood on most occasions, or even to
understand others, but enough to perceive clearly when he fails to
become intelligible or when they experience a like difficulty with him.
Upon an earlier occasion, before he had made so much progress, being one
day left to his own resources, and feeling an internal lack, he entered
what appeared to be a tea-shop of reputable demeanour, and, seating
himself at one of the little marble tables, he freely pronounced the
carefully-learned word “rice” to the attending nymph. To put aside all
details of preparation (into which, indeed, this person could not
enter) he waved his hand gracefully, at the same time smiling with an
expression of tolerant acquiescence, as of one who would say that what
was good enough to be cooked and offered by so entrancing a maiden
was good enough to be eaten by him. After remaining in unruffled
tranquillity for the full portion of an hour, and observing that no
other person around had to wait above half that period, this one began
to perceive that the enterprise was not likely to terminate in a
manner satisfactory to himself; so that, leaving this place with a few
well-chosen phrases of intolerable regret in his own tongue, he entered
another, and conducted himself in a like fashion.... Towards evening,
with an unperturbed exterior, but materially afflicted elsewhere, this
person seated himself within the eleventh tea-shop, and, pointing first
towards his own constituents of digestion, then at the fire, and
lastly in an upward direction, thereby signified to any not of stunted
intellect that he had reached such a condition of mind and body that he
was ready to consume whatever the ruling deities were willing to allot,
whether boiled, baked, roast, or suspended from a skewer. In this
resolve nothing would move him, until--after many maidens had approached
with outstretched hands and gestures of despair--there presently entered
a person wearing the helmet of a warrior and the manner of a high
official, who spoke strongly, yet persuasively, of the virtues of
immediate movement and a quiet and reposeful bearing.

Assuredly a people who devote so little attention to the study of food,
and all matters connected with it, must inevitably remain barbaric,
however skilfully they may feign a superficial refinement. It is said,
although I do not commit this matter to my own brush, that among them
are more books composed on subjects which have no actual existence
than on cooking, and, incredible as it may appear, to be exceptionally
round-bodied confers no public honour upon the individual. Should a
favourable occasion present itself, there are many who do not scruple to
jest upon the subject of food, or, what is incalculably more depraved,
upon the scarcity of it.

Nevertheless, there are exceptions of a highly distinguished radiance.
Among these must be accounted one into whose presence this person was
recently led by our polished and harmonious friend Quang-Tsun, the
merchant in tea and spices. This versatile person, whose business-name
is spoken of as Jones Bob-Jones, is worthy of all benignant respect,
and in a really enlightened country would doubtless be raised to a
more exalted position than that of a breaker of outsides (an occupation
difficult to express adequately in the written language of a country
where it is unknown), for his face is like the sun setting in the time
of harvest, his waist garment excessive, and the undoubted symmetry of
his middle portions honourable in the extreme. So welcome in my eyes,
after witnessing an unending stream of concave and attenuated barbarian
ghosts, was the sight of these perfections of Jones Bob-Jones, that
instead of the formal greeting of this Island--the unmeaning “How do
you do it?”--I shook hands cordially with myself, and exclaimed
affectionately in our own language, “Illimitable felicities! How is your
stomach?”

“Well,” replied Jones Bob-Jones, after Quang-Tsun had interpreted this
polite salutation to his understanding, “since you mention it, that’s
just the trouble; but I’m going on pretty well, thanks. I’ve tried most
of the advertised things, and now my doctor has put me practically on a
bread-and-water course--clear soup, boiled fish, plain joint, no sweets,
a crumb of cheese, and a bare three glasses of Hermitage.”

During this amiable remark (of which, as it is somewhat of a technical
nature, I was unable to grasp the contained significance until the
agreeable Quang-Tsun had subsequently repeated it several times for my
retention), I maintained a consistent expression of harmonious agreement
and gratified esteem (suitable, I find, for all like occasions), and
then, judging from the sympathetic animation of Jones Bob-Jones’s
countenance, that it had not improbably been connected with food,
I discreetly introduced the subject of sea-snails, preserved in the
essence of crushed peaches, by courteously inquiring whether he had ever
partaken of such a delicacy.

“No,” replied the liberal-minded person, when--encouraged by the
protruding eagerness of his eyes at the mention of the viand--I had
further spoken of the refined flavour of the dish, and explained the
manner of its preparation. “I can’t say that I have, but it sounds
uncommonly good--something like turtle, I should imagine. I’ll see if
they can get it for me at Pimm’s.”

This filial tribute goes by a trusty hand, in the person of one Ki Nihy,
who is shortly committing himself to the protection of his ancestors
and the voracity of the unbounded Bitter Waters; and with brightness
and gold it will doubtless reach you in the course of twelve or eighteen
moons. The superstitious here, this person may describe, when they wish
to send messages from one to another, inscribe upon the outer cover a
written representation of the one whose habitation they require, and
after affixing a small paper talisman, drop it into a hole in the
nearest wall, in the hope that it may be ultimately conveyed to the
appointed spot, either by the services of the charitably-disposed
passer-by, or by the intervention of the beneficent deities.

With a multiplicity of greetings and many abject expressions of a
conscious inferiority, and attested by an unvarying thumb-mark.

KONG HO. (Effete branch of a pure and magnanimous trunk.)


To Kong Ah-Paik, reclining beneath the sign of the Lead Tortoise, in a
northerly direction beyond the Lotus Beds outside the city of Yuen-ping.
The Middle Flowery Kingdom.




LETTER II


 Concerning the ill-destined manner of existence of the hound
 Hercules. The thoughtlessly-expressed desire of the
 entrancing maiden and its effect upon a person of
 susceptible refinement. The opportune (as it may yet be
 described) visit of one Herbert. The behaviour of those
 around. Reflections.


VENERATED SIRE (whose large right hand is continuously floating in
spirit over the image of this person’s dutiful submission),--

Doubtless to your all-consuming prescience, it will at once become plain
that I have abandoned the place of residence from which I directed my
former badly-written and offensively-constructed letter, the house of
the sympathetic and resourceful Maidens Blank, where in return for an
utterly inadequate sum of money, produced at stated intervals, this very
much inferior person was allowed to partake of a delicately-balanced and
somewhat unvarying fare in the company of the engaging of both sexes,
and afterwards to associate on terms of honourable equality with them in
the chief apartment. The reason and manner of this one’s departure
are in no degree formidable to his refined manner of conducting any
enterprise, but arose partly from an insufficient grasp of the more
elaborate outlines of a confessedly involved language, and still more
from a too excessive impetuousness in carrying out what at the time he
believed to be the ambition of one who had come to exercise a melodious
influence over his most internal emotions. Well remarked the Sage, “A
piece of gold may be tried between the teeth; a written promise to pay
may be disposed of at a sacrifice to one more credulous; but what shall
be said of the wind, the Hoang Ho, and the way of a woman?”

To contrive a pitfall for this short-sighted person’s immature feet,
certain malicious spirits had so willed it that the chief and more
autumnal of the Maidens Blank (who, nevertheless, wore an excessively
flower-like name), had long lavished herself upon the possession of an
obtuse and self-assertive hound, which was in the habit of gratifying
this inconsiderable person and those who sat around by continually
depositing upon their unworthy garments details of its outer surface,
and when the weather was more than usually cold, by stretching its
graceful and refined body before the fire in such a way as to ensure
that no one should suffer from a too acute exposure to the heat. From
these causes, and because it was by nature a hound which even on the
darkest night could be detected at a more than reasonable distance away,
while at all times it did not hesitate to shake itself freely into
the various prepared viands, this person (and doubtless others also)
regarded it with an emotion very unfavourable towards its prolonged
existence; but observing from the first that those who permitted
themselves to be deposited upon, and their hands and even their faces to
be hound-tongue-defiled with the most externally cheerful spirit of
word suppression, invariably received the most desirable of the allotted
portions of food, he judged it prudent and conducive to a settled
digestion to greet it with favourable terms and actions, and to refer
frequently to its well-displayed proportions, and to the agile dexterity
which it certainly maintained in breathing into the contents of every
dish. Thus the matter may be regarded as being positioned for a space of
time.

One evening I returned at the appointed gong-stroke of dinner, and was
beginning, according to my custom, to greet the hound with ingratiating
politeness, when the one of chief authority held up a reproving hand, at
the same time exclaiming:

“No, Mr. Kong, you must not encourage Hercules with your amiable
condescension, for just now he is in very bad odour with us all.”

“Undoubtedly,” replied this person, somewhat puzzled, nevertheless, that
the imperfection should thus be referred to openly by one who hitherto
had not hesitated to caress the hound with most intimate details,
“undoubtedly the surrounding has a highly concentrated acuteness
to-night, but the ever-present characteristic of the hound Hercules is
by no means new, for whenever he is in the room--”

At this point it is necessary to explain that the ceremonial etiquette
of these barbarian outcasts is both conflicting and involved. Upon
most of the ordinary occasions of life to obtrude oneself within the
conversation of another is a thing not to be done, yet repeatedly when
this unpretentious person has been relating his experience or inquiring
into the nature and meaning of certain matters which he has witnessed,
he has become aware that his words have been obliterated, as it were,
and his remarks diverted from their original intention by the sudden and
unanticipated desire of those present to express themselves loudly on
some topic of not really engrossing interest. Not infrequently on such
occasions every one present has spoken at once with concentrated anxiety
upon the condition of the weather, the atmosphere of the room, the hour
of the day, or some like detail of contemptible inferiority. At other
times maidens of unquestionable politeness have sounded instruments of
brass or stringed woods with unceasing vigour, have cast down ornaments
of china, or even stood upon each other’s--or this person’s--feet with
assumed inelegance. When, therefore, in the midst of my agreeable remark
on the asserted no fragrance of the hound Hercules, a gentleman of
habitual refinement struck me somewhat heavily on the back of the head
with a reclining seat which he was conveying across the room for the
acceptance of a lady, and immediately overwhelmed me with apologies
of almost unnecessary profusion, my mind at once leapt to an inspired
conclusion, and smiling acquiescently I bowed several times to each
person to convey to them an admission of the undoubted fact that to the
wise a timely omen before the storm is as effective as a thunderbolt
afterwards.

It chanced that there was present the exceptionally prepossessing maiden
to whom this person has already referred. So varied and ornate were her
attractions that it would be incompetent in one of my less than average
ability to attempt an adequate portrayal. She had a light-coloured name
with the letters so harmoniously convoluted as to be quite beyond my
inferior power of pronunciation, so that if I wished to refer to her
in her absence I had to indicate the one I meant by likening her to
a full-blown chrysanthemum, a piece of rare jade, an ivory pagoda of
unapproachable antiquity, or some other object of admitted grace. Even
this description may scarcely convey to you the real extent of her
elegant personality; but in her presence my internal organs never failed
to vibrate with a most entrancing uncertainty, and even now, at the
recollection of her virtuous demeanour, I am by no means settled within
myself.

“Well,” exclaimed this melodious vision, with sympathetic tact, “if
every one is going to disown poor Hercules because he has eaten all our
dinners, I shall be quite willing to have him, for he is a dzear ole
loveykins, wasn’t ums?” (This, O my immaculate and dignified sire, which
I transcribe with faithful undeviation, appears to be the dialect of
a remote province, spoken only by maidens--both young and of autumnal
solitude--under occasional mental stress; as of a native of Shan-si
relapsing without consciousness into his uncouth tongue after passing a
lifetime in the Capital.) “Don’t you think so too, Mr. Kong?”

“When the sun shines the shadow falls, for truly it is said, ‘To the
faithful one even the voice of the corncrake at evening speaks of his
absent love,’” replied this person, so engagingly disconcerted at
being thus openly addressed by the maiden that he retained no delicate
impression of what she said, or even of what he was replying, beyond
an unassuming hope that the nature of his feelings might perchance be
inoffensively revealed to her in the semblance of a discreet allegory.

“Perhaps,” interposed a person of neglected refinement, turning towards
the maiden, “you would like to have a corncrake also, to remind you of
Mr. Kong?”

“I do not know what a corncrake is like,” replied the maiden with
commendable dignity. “I do not think so, however, for I once had a pair
of canaries, and I found them very unsatisfying, insipid creatures. But
I should love to have a little dog I am sure, only Miss Blank won’t hear
of it.”

“Kong Ho,” thought this person inwardly, “not in vain have you burnt
joss sticks unceasingly, for the enchanting one has said into your
eyes that she would love to partake of a little dog. Assuredly we have
recently consumed the cold portion of sheep on more occasions than a
strict honourableness could require of those who pay a stated sum at
regular intervals, and the change would be a welcome one. As she truly
says, the flavour even of canaries is trivial and insignificant by
comparison.” During the period of dinner--which consisted of eggs and
green herbs of the field--this person allowed the contemplation to grow
within him, and inspired by a most pleasant and disinterested ambition
to carry out the expressed wishes of the one who had spoken, he
determined that the matter should be unobtrusively arranged despite the
mercenary opposition of the Maidens Blank.

This person had already learned by experience that dogs are rarely if
ever exposed for sale in the stalls of the meat venders, the reason
doubtless being that they are articles of excessive luxury and reserved
by law for the rich and powerful. Those kept by private persons are
generally closely guarded when they approach a desirable condition of
body, and the hound Hercules would not prove an attractive dish to those
who had known him in life. Nevertheless, it is well said, “The Great
Wall is unsurmountable, but there are many gaps through,” and that
same evening I was able to carry the first part of my well-intentioned
surprise into effect.

The matter now involves one named Herbert, who having exchanged gifts
of betrothal with a maiden staying at the house, was in the habit of
presenting himself openly, when he was permitted to see her, after the
manner of these barbarians. (Yet even of them the more discriminating
acknowledge that our customs are immeasurably superior; for when I
explained to the aged father of the Maidens Blank that among us the
marriage rites are irrevocably performed before the bride is seen
unveiled by man, he sighed heavily and exclaimed that the parents of
this country had much to learn.)

The genial-minded Herbert had already acquired for himself the
reputation of being one who ceaselessly removes the gravity of others,
both by word and action, and from the first he selected this obscure
person for his charitable purpose to a most flattering extent. Not only
did he--on the pretext that his memory was rebellious--invariably greet
me as “Mr. Hong Kong,” but on more than one occasion he insisted, with
mirth-provoking reference to certain details of my unbecoming garments,
that I must surely have become confused and sent a Mrs. Hong Kong
instead of myself, and frequently he undermined the gravity of all most
successfully by pulling me backwards suddenly by the pigtail, with the
plea that he imagined he was picking up his riding-whip. This attractive
person was always accompanied by a formidable dog--of convex limbs,
shrunken lip, and suspicious demeanour--which he called Influenza, to
the excessive amusement of those to whom he related its characteristics.
For some inexplicable reason from the first it regarded my lower apparel
as being unsuitable for the ordinary occasions of life, and in spite
of the low hissing call by which its master endeavoured to attract
its attention to himself, it devoted its energies unceasingly to the
self-imposed task of removing them fragment by fragment. Nevertheless it
was a dog of favourable size and condition, and it need not therefore be
a matter for surprise that when the intellectual person Herbert took
his departure on the day in question it had to be assumed that it had
already preceded him. Having accomplished so much, this person found
little difficulty in preparing it tastefully in his own apartment, and
making the substitution on the following day.

Although his mind was confessedly enlarged at the success of his
venture, and his hopes most ornamentally coloured at the thought of the
adorable one’s gratified esteem when she discovered how expertly her
wishes had been carried out, this person could not fail to notice that
the Maiden Blank was also materially agitated when she distributed the
contents of the dish before her.

“Will you, of your enlightened courtesy, accept, and overlook the
deficiencies of, a portion of rabbit-pie, O high-souled Mr. Kong?” she
inquired gracefully when this insignificant person was reached, and,
concealing my many-hued emotion beneath an impassive face, I bowed
agreeably as I replied, “To the beggar, black bread is a royal course.”

“WHAT pie did you say, dear?” whispered another autumnal maiden, when
all had partaken somewhat, and at her words a most consistently acute
silence involved the table.

“I--I don’t quite know,” replied the one of the upper end, becoming
excessively devoid of complexion; and restraining her voice she
forthwith sent down an attending slave to inquire closely.

At this point a person of degraded ancestry endeavoured to remove the
undoubted cloud of depression by feigning the nocturnal cry of the
domestic cat; but in this he was not successful, and a maiden opposite,
after fixedly regarding a bone on her plate, withdrew suddenly,
embracing herself as she went. A moment later the slave returned,
proclaiming aloud that the dish which had been prepared for the occasion
had now been accidentally discovered by the round-bodied cook beneath
the cushions of an arm-chair (a spot by no means satisfactory to this
person’s imagination had the opportunities at his disposal been more
diffuse).

“What, then, is this of which we have freely partaken?” cried they
around, and, in the really impressive silence which followed, an
inopportune person discovered a small silver tablet among the fragments
upon his plate, and, taking it up, read aloud the single word,
“Influenza.”

During the day, and even far into the uncounted gong-strokes of the
time of darkness, this person had frequently remained in a fascinated
contemplation of the moment when he should reveal himself and stand up
to receive the benevolently-expressed congratulations of all who paid
an agreed sum at fixed intervals, and, particularly, the dazzling though
confessedly unsettling glance-thanks of the celestially-formed maiden
who had explicitly stated that she was desirous of having a little
dog. Now, however, when this part of the enterprise ought to have taken
place, I found myself unable to evade the conclusion that some important
detail of the entire scheme had failed to agree harmoniously with the
rest, and, had it been possible, I would have retired with unobtrusive
tact and permitted another to wear my honourable acquirements. But, for
some reason, as I looked around I perceived that every eye was fixed
upon me with what at another time would have been a most engaging
unanimity, and, although I bowed with undeterred profusion, and
endeavoured to walk out behind an expression of all-comprehensive
urbanity that had never hitherto failed me, a person of unsympathetic
outline placed himself before the door, and two others, standing one
on each side of me, gave me to understand that a recital of the full
happening was required before I left the room.

It is hopeless to expect a display of refined intelligence at the hands
of a people sunk in barbarism and unacquainted with the requirements of
true dignity and the essentials of food preparation. On the manner
of behaving of the male portion of those present this person has
no inducement whatever to linger. Even the maiden for whom he had
accomplished so much, after the nature of the misunderstanding had been
made plain to her, uttered only a single word of approval, which, on
subsequently consulting a book of interpretations, this person found to
indicate: “A person of weak intellect; one without an adequate sense of
the proportion and fitness of things; a buffoon; a jester; a compound of
gooseberries scalded and crushed with cream”; but although each of these
definitions may in a way be regarded as applicable, he is still unable
to decide which was the precise one intended.

With salutations of filial regard, and in a spirit seven times refined
by affliction and purified by vain regrets.

KONG HO. (Upon whose tablet posterity will perchance inscribe the
titles, “Ill-destined but Misjudged.”)




LETTER III


 Concerning the virtuous amusements of both old and young.
 The sit-round games. The masterpiece of the divine Li Tang,
 and its reception by all, including that same Herbert.


VENERATED SIRE (whose breadth of mind is so well developed as to take
for granted boundless filial professions, which, indeed, become vapid by
a too frequent reiteration),--

Your amiable inquiry as to how the barbarians pass their time, when not
employed in affairs of commerce or in worshipping their ancestors, has
inspired me to examine the matter more fully. At the same time your
pleasantly-composed aphorism that the interior nature of persons does
not vary with the colour of their eyes, and that if I searched I should
find the old flying kites and the younger kicking feather balls or
working embroidery, according to their sex, does not appear to be
accurately sustained.

The lesser ones, it is true, engage in a variety of sumptuous
handicrafts, such as the scorching of wooden tablets with the semblance
of a pattern, and gouging others with sharpened implements into a crude
relief; depicting birds and flowers upon the surface of plates, rending
leather into shreds, and entwining beaten iron, brass, and copper into a
diversity of most ingenious complications; but when I asked a maiden of
affectionate and domesticated appearance whether she had yet worked her
age-stricken father’s coffin-cloth, she said that the subject was one
upon which she declined to jest, and rapidly involving herself in a
profuse display of emotion, she withdrew, leaving this one aghast.

To enable my mind to retranquillise, I approached a youth
of highly-gilded appearance, and, with many predictions of
self-inferiority, I suggested that we should engage in the stimulating
rivalry of feather ball. When he learned, however, that the diversion
consisted in propelling upwards a feather-trimmed chip by striking it
against the side of the foot, he candidly replied that he was afraid
he had grown out of shuttle-cock, but did not mind, if I was vigorously
inclined, “taking me on for a set of yang-pong.”

Old men here, it is said, do not fly kites, and they affect to despise
catching flies for amusement, although they frequently go fishing.
Struck by this peculiarity, I put it in the form of an inquiry to one
of venerable appearance, why, when at least five score flies were
undeniably before his eyes, he preferred to recline for lengthy periods
by the side of a stream endeavouring to snare creatures of whose
existence he himself had never as yet received any adequate proof.
Doubtless in my contemptible ignorance, however, I used some word
inaccurately, for those who stood around suffered themselves to become
amused, and the one in question replied with no pretence of amiable
condescension that the jest had already been better expressed a hundred
times, and that I would find the behind parts of a printed leaf
called “Punch” in the bookcase. Not being desirous of carrying on
a conversation of which I felt that I had misplaced the most highly
rectified ingredient, I bowed repeatedly, and replied affably that
wisdom ruled his left side and truth his right.

It was upon this same occasion that a young man of unprejudiced
wide-mindedness, taking me aside, asserted that the matter had not been
properly set forth when I was inquiring about kites. Both old and young
men, he continued, frequently endeavoured to fly kites, even in the
involved heart of the city. He had tried once or twice himself, but
never with encouraging success, chiefly, he was told, because his paper
was not good enough. Many people, he added, would not scruple to mislead
me with evasive ambiguity on this one subject owing to an ill-balanced
conception of what constituted true dignity, but he was unwilling
that his countrymen should be thought by mine to be sunk into a deeper
barbarism than actually existed.

His warning was not inopportune. Seated next to this person at a later
period was a maiden from whose agreeably-poised lips had hitherto
proceeded nothing but sincerity and fact. Watching her closely I asked
her, as one who only had a languid interest either one way or the
other, whether her revered father or her talented and richly-apparelled
brothers ever spent their time flying kites about the city. In spite of
a most efficient self-control her colour changed at my words, and her
features trembled for a moment, but quickly reverting to herself she
replied that she thought not; then--as though to subdue my suspicions
more completely--that she was sure they did not, as the kites would
certainly frighten the horses and the appointed watchmen of the street
would not allow it. She confessed, however, with unassumed candour, that
the immediate descendants of her sister were gracefully proficient in
the art.

From this, great and enlightened one, you will readily perceive
how misleading an impression might be carried away by a person
scrupulously-intentioned but not continually looking both ways, when
placed among a people endowed with the uneasy suspicion of the barbarian
and struggling to assert a doubtful refinement. Apart from this, there
has to be taken into consideration their involved process of reasoning,
and the unexpectedly different standards which they apply to every
subject.

At the house of the Maidens Blank, when the evening was not spent in
listening to melodious voices and the harmony of stringed woods, it was
usual to take part in sit-round games of various kinds. (And while it
is on his brush this person would say with commendable pride that a
well-trained musician among us can extort more sound from a hollow
wooden pig, costing only a few cash, than the most skilful here ever
attain on their largest instrument--a highly-lacquered coffin on legs,
filled with bells and hidden springs, and frequently sold for a thousand
taels.)

Upon a certain evening, at the conclusion of one sit-round game which
involved abrupt music, a barrier of chairs, and the exhilarating
possibility of being sat upon by the young and vivacious in their zeal,
a person of the company turned suddenly to the one who is communicating
with you and said enticingly, “Why did Birdcage Walk?”

Not judging from his expression that this was other than a polite
inquiry on a matter which disturbed his repose, I was replying that the
manifestation was undoubtedly the work of a vexatious demon which had
taken up its abode in the article referred to, when another, by my side,
cried aloud, “Because it envied Queen Anne’s Gate”; and without a pause
cast back the question, “Who carved The Poultry?”

In spite of the apparent simplicity of the demand it was received by
all in an attitude of complicated doubt, and this person was considering
whether he might not acquire distinction by replying that such an office
fell by custom to the lot of the more austere Maiden Blank, when the
very inadequate reply, “Mark Lane with St. Mary’s Axe,” was received
with applause and some observations in a half-tone regarding the
identity of the fowl.

By the laws of the sit-round games the one who had last spoken now
proclaimed himself, demanding to know, “Why did Battersea Rise?” but the
involvement was evidently superficial, for the maiden at whose memory
this one’s organs still vibrate ignobly at once replied, “Because it
thought Clapham Common,” in turn inquiring, “What made the Marble Arch?”

Although I would have willingly sacrificed to an indefinite extent to be
furnished with the preconcerted watchword, so that I might have enlarged
myself in the eyes of this consecrated being’s unapproachable esteem,
I had already decided that the competition was too intangible for
one whose thoughts lay in well-defined parallel lines, and it fell to
another to reply, “To hear Salisbury Court.”

This, O my broad-minded ancestor of the first degree--an aimless
challenge coupled with the name of one recognisable spot, replied to by
the haphazard retort of another place, frequently in no way joined to
it, was regarded as an exceptionally fascinating sit-round game by a
company of elderly barbarians!

“What couldn’t Walbrook?” it might be, and “Such Cheapside,” would be
deemed a praiseworthy solution. “When did King’s Bench Walk?” would
be asked, and to reply, “When Gray’s Inn Road,” covered the one with
overpowering acclamation. “Bevis Marks only an Inner Circle at The
Butts; why?” was a demand of such elaborate complexity that (although
this person was lured out of his self-imposed restraint by the silence
of all round, and submerging his intelligence to an acquired level,
unobtrusively suggested, “Because Aylesbury ducks, perchance”) it fell
to the one propounding to announce, “Because St. John’s Wood Shoot-up
Hill.”

Admittedly it is written, “When the shutter is fastened the girdle is
loosened,” but it is as truly said, “Not in the head, nor yet in the
feet, but in the organs of digestion does wisdom reside,” and even in
jesting the middle course of neither an excessive pride nor an absolute
weak-mindedness is to be observed. With what concrete pangs of acute
mental distress would this person ever behold his immaculate progenitor
taking part in a similar sit-round game with an assembly of worthy
mandarins, the one asking questions of meaningless import, as “Why
did they Hangkow?” and another replying in an equal strain of no
consecutiveness, “In order to T’in Tung!”

At length a person who is spoken of as having formerly been the captain
of a band of warriors turned to me with an unsuspected absence of
ferocity and said, “Your countrymen are very proficient in the art
of epigram, are they not, Mr. Kong? Will you not, in turn, therefore,
favour us with an example?” Whereupon several maidens exclaimed with
engaging high temper, “Oh yes; do ask us some funny Chinese riddles, Mr.
Kong!”

“Assuredly there are among us many classical instances of the light
sayings which require matching,” I replied, gratified that I should have
the opportunity of showing their superiority. “One, harmonious
beyond the blend of challenge and retort, is as follows--‘The Phoenix
embroidered upon the side of the shoe: When the shoe advances the
Phoenix leaps forward.’”

“Oh!” cried several of the maidens, and from the nature of their glances
it might reasonably be gathered that already they began to recognise the
inferiority of their own sayings.

“Is that the question, or the answer, or both?” asked a youth of
unfledged maturity, and to hide their conscious humiliation several
persons allowed their faces to melt away.

“That which has been expressed,” replied this person with an ungrudging
toleration, “is the first or question portion of the contrast. The
answer is that which will be supplied by your honourable condescension.”

“But,” interposed one of the maidens, “it isn’t really a question, you
know, Mr. Kong.”

“In a way of regarding it, it may be said to be question, inasmuch as it
requires an answer to establish the comparison. The most pleasing answer
is that which shall be dissimilar in idea, and yet at the same time
maintain the most perfect harmony of parallel thought,” I replied. “Now
permit your exceptional minds to wander in a forest of similitudes: ‘The
Phoenix embroidered upon the side of the shoe: When the shoe advances
the Phoenix leaps forward.’”

“Oh, if that’s all you want,” said the one Herbert, who by an ill
destiny chanced to be present, “‘The red-hot poker held before the Cat’s
nose: When the poker advances the Cat leaps backwards.’”

“Oh, very good!” cried several of those around, “of course it naturally
would. Is that right, Mr. Kong?”

“If the high-souled company is satisfied, then it must be, for there is
no conclusive right or wrong--only an unending search for that which
is most gem-set and resourceful,” replied this person, with an
ever-deepening conviction of no enthusiasm towards the sit-round game.
“But,” he added, resolved to raise for a moment the canopy of a mind
swan-like in its crystal many-sidedness, and then leave them to their
own ineptitude, “for five centuries nothing has been judged equal to
the solution offered by Li Tang. At the time he was presented with
a three-sided banner of silk with the names of his eleven immediate
ancestors embroidered upon it in seven colours, and his own name is
still handed down in imperishable memory.”

“Oh, do tell us what it was,” cried many. “It must have been clever.”

“‘The Dragon painted upon the face of the fan: When the fan is shaken
the Dragon flies upwards,’” replied this person.

It cannot be denied that this was received with an attitude of
respectful melancholy strikingly complimentary to the wisdom of the
gifted Li Tang. But whether it may be that the time was too short to
assimilate the more subtle delicacies of the saying, or whether the
barbarian mind is inherently devoid of true balance, this person was
panged most internally to hear one say to another as he went out, “Do
you know, I really think that Herbert’s was much the better answer of
the two--more realistic, and what you might expect at the pantomime.” *

A like inability to grasp with a clear and uninvolved vision, permeates
not only the triviality of a sit-round game but even the most important
transactions of existence.

Shortly after his arrival in the Island, this person was initiated
by the widely-esteemed Quang-Tsun into the private life of one whose
occupation was that of a Law-giver, where he frequently drank tea
on terms of mutual cordiality. Upon such an occasion he was one day
present, conversing with the lesser ones of the household--the head
thereof being absent, setting forth the Law in the Temple--when one of
the maidens cried out with amiable vivacity, “Why, Mr. Kong, you say
such consistently graceful things of the ladies you have met over here,
that we shall expect you to take back an English wife with you. But
perhaps you are already married in China?”

“The conclusion is undeviating in its accuracy,” replied this person,
unable to evade the allusion. “To Ning, Hia-Fa and T’ain Yen, as the
matter stands.”

“Ning Hia-Fa An T’ain Yen!” exclaimed the wife of the Law-giver
pleasantly. “What an important name. Can you pardon our curiosity and
tell us what she is like?”

“Ning, Hia-Fa AND T’ain Yen,” repeated this person, not submitting to
be deprived of the consequence of two wives without due protest. “Three
names, three wives. Three very widely separated likes.”

At this in no way boastfully uttered statement the agreeably outlined
surface of the faces around variated suddenly, the effect being one
which I have frequently observed in the midst of my politest expressions
of felicity. For a moment, indeed, I could not disguise from myself that
the one who had made the inquiry stretched forth her lotus-like hand
towards the secret spring by which it is customary to summon the
attending slaves from the underneath parts, but restraining herself
with the manner of one who would desire to make less of a thing that it
otherwise might seem, she turned to me again.

“How nice!” she murmured. “What a pity you did not bring them all with
you, Mr. Kong. They would have been a great acquisition.”

“Yet it must be well weighed,” I replied, not to be out-complimented
touching one another, “that here they would have met so many fine and
superior gentlemen that they might have become dissatisfied with my less
than average prepossessions.”

“I wonder if they did not think of that in your case, and refuse to let
you come,” said one of the maidens.

“The various persons must not be regarded as being on their all fours,”
 I replied, anxious that there should be no misunderstanding on this
point. “They, of course, reside within one inner chamber, but there
would be no duplicity in this one adding indefinitely to the number.”

“Of course not; how silly of me!” exclaimed the maiden. “What splendid
musical evenings you can have. But tell me, Mr. Kong (ought it not to be
Messrs. Kong, mamma?), if a girl married you here would she be legally
married to you in China?”

“Oh yes,” replied this person positively.

“But could you not, by your own laws, have the marriage set aside
whenever you wished?”

“Assuredly,” I admitted. “It is so appointed.”

“Then how could she be legally married?” she persisted, with really
unbecoming suspicion.

“Legally married, legally unmarried,” replied this person, quite
distressed within himself at not being able to understand the difficulty
besetting her. “All perfectly legal and honourably observed.”

“I think, Gwendoline--” said the one of authority, and although the
matter was no further expressed, by an instinct which he was powerless
to avert, this person at once found himself rising with ceremonious
partings.

Not desiring that the obstacle should remain so inadequately swept
away, I have turned my presumptuous footsteps in the direction of the
Law-giver’s house on several later occasions, but each time the word of
the slave guarding the door has been that they of the household,
down even to those of the most insignificant degree of kinship, have
withdrawn to a distant and secluded spot.

With renewed assurances that the enterprise is being gracefully
conducted, however ill-digested and misleading these immature
compositions may appear.

KONG HO.




LETTER IV


 Concerning a desire to expatiate upon subjects of
 philosophical importance and its no accomplishment. Three
 examples of the mental concavity sunk into by these
 barbarians. An involved episode which had the outward
 appearance of being otherwise than what it was.


VENERATED SIRE (whose genial liberality on all necessary occasions
is well remembered by this person in his sacrifices, with the titles
“Benevolent” and “Open-sleeved”),--

I had it in my head at one time to tell you somewhat of the Classics
most reverenced in this country, of the philosophical opinions which
prevail, and to enlighten you generally upon certain other subjects of
distinguished eminence. As the deities arranged, however, it chanced
that upon my way to a reputable quarter of the city where the actuality
of these matters can be learnt with the least evasion, my footsteps were
drawn aside by an incident which now permeates my truth-laden brush to
the exclusion of all else.

But in the first place, if it be permitted for a thoroughly
untrustworthy son to take so presumptuous a liberty with an unvaryingly
sagacious father, let this one entreat you to regard everything he
writes in a very wide-headed spirit of looking at the matter from all
round. My former letters will have readily convinced you that much that
takes place here, even among those who can afford long finger-nails,
would not be tolerated in Yuen-ping, and in order to avoid the suspicion
that I am suffering from a serious injury to the head, or have become
a prey to a conflicting demon, it will be necessary to continue an
even more highly-sustained tolerant alertness. This person himself has
frequently suffered the ill effects of rashly assuming that because he
is conducting the adventure in a prepossessing spirit his efforts will
be honourably received, as when he courteously inquired the ages of a
company of maidens into whose presence he was led, and complimented the
one whom he was desirous of especially gratifying by assuring her that
she had every appearance of being at least twice the nine-and-twenty
years to which she modestly laid claim.

Upon another occasion I entered a barber’s stall, and finding it
oppressively hot within, I commanded the attendant to carry a reclining
stool into the street and there shave my lower limbs and anoint my head.
As he hesitated to obey--doubtless on account of the trivial labour
involved--I repeated my words in a tone of fuller authority, holding out
the inducement of a just payment when he complied, and assuring him that
he would certainly be dragged before the nearest mandarin and tortured
if he held his joints stiffly. At this he evidently understood his
danger, for obsequiously protesting that he was only a barber of very
mean attainments, and that his deformed utensils were quite inadequate
for the case, he very courteously directed me in inquire for a public
chariot bound for a quarter called Colney Hatch (the place of commerce,
it is reasonable to infer, of the higher class barbers), and, seating
myself in it, instruct the attendant to put me down at the large gates,
where they possessed every requisite appliance, and also would, if
desirable, shave my head also. Here the incident assumes a more doubtful
guise, for, notwithstanding the admitted politeness of the one who
spoke, each of those to whom I subsequently addressed myself on the
subject, presented to me a face quite devoid of encouragement. While
none actually pointed out the vehicle I sought, many passed on in a
state of inward contemplation without replying, and some--chiefly the
attendants of other chariots of a similar kind--replied in what I deemed
to be a spirit of elusive metaphor, as he who asserted that such a
conveyance must be sought for at a point known intimately as the Aldgate
Pump, whence it started daily at half-past the thirteenth gong-stroke;
and another, who maintained that I had no prospect of reaching the
desired spot until I secured the services of one of a class of female
attendants who wear flowing blue robes in order to indicate that they
are prepared to encounter and vanquish any emergency in life. To make no
elaborate pretence in the matter this person may definitely admit that
he never did reach the place in question, nor--in spite of a diligent
search in which he has encountered much obloquy--has he yet found any
barber sufficiently well equipped to undertake the detail.

Even more recently I suffered the unmerited rebuke of the superficial
through performing an act of deferential politeness. Learning that the
enlightened and magnanimous sovereign of this country was setting out on
a journey I stationed myself in the forefront of those who stood before
his palace, intending to watch such parts of the procession as might be
fitly witnessed by one of my condition. When these had passed, and the
chariot of the greatest approached, I respectfully turned my back to
the road with a propitiatory gesture, as of one who did not deem himself
worthy even to look upon a being of such majestic rank and acknowledged
excellence. This delicate action, by some incredible process of mental
obliquity, was held by those around to be a deliberate insult, if not
even a preconcerted signal, of open treachery, and had not a heaven-sent
breeze at that moment carried the hat of a very dignified bystander into
the upper branches of an opportune tree, and successfully turned aside
the attention of the assembly into a most immoderate exhibition of utter
loss of gravity, I should undoubtedly have been publicly tortured, if
not actually torn to pieces.

But the incident first alluded to was of an even more
elaborately-contrived density than these, and some of the details are
still unrolled before the keenest edge of this one’s inner perception.
Nevertheless, all is now set down in unbroken exactness for your
impartial judgment.

At the time of this exploit I had only ventured out on a few occasions,
and then, save those recorded, to no considerable extent; for it had
already become obvious that the enterprises in which I persistently
became involved never contributed to my material prosperity, and the
disappointment of finding that even when I could remember nine words
of a sentence in their language none of the barbarians could understand
even so much as a tenth of my own, further cast down my enthusiasm.

On the day which has been the object of this person’s narration from
the first, he set out to become more fully instructed in the subjects
already indicated, and proceeding in a direction of which he had no
actual knowledge, he soon found himself in a populous and degraded
quarter of the city. Presently, to his reasonable astonishment, he saw
before him at a point where two ill-constructed thoroughfares met, a
spacious and important building, many-storied in height, ornamented
with a profusion of gold and crystal, marble and precious stones,
and displaying from a tall pole the three-hued emblem of undeniable
authority. A never-ending stream of people passed in and out by the
numerous doors; the strains of expertly wielded instruments could be
distinctly heard inside, and the warm odour of a most prepossessing
spiced incense permeated the surroundings. “Assuredly,” thought the
person who is now recording the incident, “this is one of the Temples
of barbarian worship”; and to set all further doubt at rest he saw in
letters of gilt splendour a variety of praiseworthy and appropriate
inscriptions, among which he read and understood, “Excellent,” “Fine
Old,” “Well Matured,” “Spirits only of the choicest quality within,”
 together with many other invocations from which he could not wrest the
hidden significance, as “Old Vatted,” “Barclay’s Entire,” “An Ordinary
at One,” and the like.

By this time an impressive gathering had drawn around, and from its
manner of behaving conveyed the suspicion that an entertainment or
manifestation of some kind was confidently awaited. To disperse so
outrageous a misconception this person was on the point of withdrawing
himself when he chanced to see, over the principal door of the Temple,
a solid gold figure of colossal magnitude, represented as crowned with
leaves and tendrils, and holding in his outstretched hands a gigantic,
and doubtless symbolic, bunch of grapes. “This,” I said to myself, “is
evidently the tutelary deity of the place, so displayed to receive the
worship of the passer-by.” With the discovery a thought of the most
irreproachable benevolence possessed me. “Why should not this person,” I
reflected, “gain the unstinted approbation of those barbarians” (who by
this time completely encircled me in) “by doing obeisance towards their
deity, and by the same act delicately and inoffensively rebuke them for
their own too-frequent intolerable attitude towards the susceptibilities
of others? As an unprejudiced follower, in his own land, of the systems
of Confucius, Lao-tse, and Buddha, this person already recognises the
claims of seventeen thousand nine hundred and thirty-three deities of
various grades, so that the addition of one more to that number can be
a heresy of very trivial expiation.” Inspired by these honourable
sentiments, therefore, I at once prostrated myself on the ground, and,
amid a silence of really illimitable expectation, I began to kow-tow
repeatedly with ceremonious precision.

At this display of charitable broadmindedness an approving shout went
up on all sides. Thus encouraged I proceeded to kow-tow with even more
unceasing assiduousness, and presently words of definite encouragement
mingled with the shout. “Do not flag in your amiable disinterestedness,
Kong Ho,” I whispered in my ear, “and out of your well-sustained
endurance may perchance arise a cordial understanding, and ultimately
a remunerative alliance between two distinguished nations.” Filled with
this patriotic hope I did not suffer my neck to stiffen, and doubtless I
would have continued the undertaking as long as the sympathetic persons
who hemmed me in signified their refined approval, when suddenly the cry
was raised, “Look out, here comes the coppers!”

This, O my venerable-headed father, I at once guessed to be the
announcement heralding the collecting-bowl which some over-zealous
bystander was preparing to pass round on my behalf, doubtless under the
impression--so obtuse in grasping the true relationship of events are
many of the barbarians--that I was a wandering monk, displaying my
reverence for the purpose of mendicancy. Not wishing to profit by this
offensive misapprehension, I was preparing to rise, when a hand was
unceremoniously laid upon my shoulder, and turning round I saw behind me
one of the official watch--a class of men so powerful that at a gesture
from their uplifted hands even the fiercest untamed horse will not
infrequently stand upon its hind legs in mute submission.

“Early morning salutations,” I said pleasantly, though somewhat involved
in speech by my exertion (for these persons are ever to be treated
with discriminating courtesy). “Prosperity to your house, O energetic
street-watcher, and a thousand grandsons to worship their illustrious
ancestor.”

“Thanks,” he replied concisely. “I’m a single man. As yet. Now then,
will you make a way there? Can you stand?”

“Stand?” repeated this person, at once recognising one of the important
words of inner meaning concerning which he had been initiated by the
versatile Quang-Tsun. “Certainly this person will not hesitate to
establish his footing if the exaction is thought to be desirable.
Let us, therefore, bend our steps in the direction of a tea-house of
unquestionable propriety.”

“You’ve bent your steps into quite enough tea-houses, as you call them,
for one day,” replied the official with evasive meaning, at the same
time assisting me to rise (for it need not be denied that the restrained
position had made me for the moment incapable of a self-sustaining
effort). “Look what you’ve done.”

At the direction of his glance I cast my eyes along the street, east and
west, and for the first time I became aware that what I had last seen as
a reasonable gathering had now taken the proportions of an innumerable
multitude which filled the entire space of the thoroughfare, while
others covered the roofs above and protruded themselves from every
available window. In our own land the interspersal of umbrellas, musical
instruments, and banners, with an occasional firework, would have given
a greater animation to the scene; but with this exception I have never
taken part in a more impressive and well-extended procession. Even
while I looked, the helmets of other official watchers appeared in the
distance, as immature junks upon the storm-tossed Whang-Hai, apparently
striving fruitlessly to reach us.

As I was by no means sure what attitude was expected of me, I smiled
with an all-embracing approval, and signified to the one at my side, by
way of passing the time pleasurably together, that the likelihood of his
nimble-witted friends reaching us with unruffled garments was remote in
the extreme.

“Don’t you let that worry you, Li Hung Chang,” he said, in a tone that
had the appearance of being outside itself around a deeper and more
bitter significance; “if we get out again with any garments at all it
won’t be your fault. Why, you--well, YOU ought to have been put on the
Black List long ago, by rights.”

This, exalted one, although I have not yet been able to learn the exact
dignity of it from any of the books of civil honours, is undoubtedly
a mark of signal attainment, conferred upon the few for distinguishing
themselves by some particular capacity; as our Double Dragon, for
instance. Anxious to learn something of the privileges of the rank from
one who evidently was not without influence in the bestowal, and not
unwilling to show him that I was by no means of low-caste descent, I
said to the official, “In his own country one of this person’s ancestors
wore the Decoration of the Yellow Scabbard, which entitled him to be
carried in his chair up to the gate of the Forbidden Palace before
descending to touch the ground. Is this Order of the Black List of a
like purport?”

“You’re right,” he said, “it is. In this country it entitles you to be
carried right inside the door at Bow Street without ever touching the
ground. Look out! Now we shall not--”

At that moment what this person at first assumed to be a floral tribute,
until he saw that not only the entire plant, but the earthenware jar
also were attached, struck the official upon the helmet, whereupon,
drawing a concealed club, he ceased speaking.

How the entertainment was conducted to such a development this person is
totally inadequate to express; but in an incredibly short space of time
the scene became one of most entrancing variety. From every visible
point around the air became filled with commodities which--though
doubtless without set intention--fittingly represented the arts,
manufactures, and natural history of this resourceful country, all cast
in prolific abundance at the feet of the official and myself, although
the greater part inevitably struck our heads and bodies before reaching
them. Beyond our immediate circle, as it may be expressed, the crowd
never ceased to press forward with resistless activity, and among
it could be seen occasionally the official watchmen advancing
self-reliantly, though frequently without helmets, and, not less often,
the helmets advancing without the official watchmen. To add to the
acknowledged interest, every person present was proclaiming his views
freely on a diversity of subjects, and above all could be heard the
clear notes of the musical instruments by which the officials sought
to encourage one another in their extremity, and to deaden the cries of
those whom they outclubbed.

Despite this person’s repeated protests that the distinction was too
excessive, he was plucked from hand to hand irresistibly among those
around, losing a portion of his ill-made attire at each step, so
agreeably anxious were all to detain him. Just when the exploit seemed
likely to have a disagreeable ending, however, he was thrust heavily
against a door which yielded, and at once barring it behind him, he
passed across the open space into which it led, along a passage between
two walls, and thence through an involved labyrinth and beneath the
waters of a canal into a wood of attractive seclusion. Here this person
remained, spending the time in a profitable meditation, until the light
withdrew and the great sky lantern had ascended. Then he cautiously
crept forth, and after some further trivial episodes which chiefly
concern the obstinate-headed slave guarding the outer door of a
tea-house, an unintelligent maiden in the employment of one vending
silk-embroidered raiment, the mercenary controller of a two-wheeled
chariot and the sympathetic and opportune arrival of a person seated
upon a funeral car, he succeeded in reaching the place of his abode.

With unalterable affection and a material request that an unstinted
adequacy of new garments may be sent by a sure and speedy hand.

KONG HO.




LETTER V


 Concerning the neglect of ancestors and its discreditable
 consequences. Two who state the matter definitely.
 Concerning the otherside way of looking at things and the
 self-contradictory bearing of the maiden Florence.


VENERATED SIRE,--A discovery of overwhelming malignity oppresses me. In
spite of much baffling ambiguity and the frequent evasion of conscious
guilt, there can be no longer any reasonable doubt that these barbarians
DO NOT WORSHIP THEIR ANCESTORS!

Hitherto the matter had rested in my mind as an uneasy breath of
suspicion, agitated from time to time by countless indications that
such a possibility might, indeed, exist in a condensed form, but too
inauspiciously profane to be contemplated in the altogether. Thus, when
in the company of the young this person has walked about the streets
of the city, he may at length have said, “Truly, out of your amiable
condescension, you have shown me a variety of entrancing scenes. Let
us now in turn visit the tombs of your ancestors, to the end that I may
transmit fitting gifts to their spirits and discharge a few propitious
fireworks as a greeting.” Yet in no case has this well-intentioned
offer been agilely received, one asserting that he did not know
the resting-place of the tombs in question, a second that he had no
ancestors, a third that Kensal Green was not an entrancing spot for
a wet afternoon, a fourth that he would see them removed to a greater
distance first, another that he drew the line at mafficking in a
cemetery, and the like. These things, it may occur to your omniscience,
might in themselves have been conclusive, yet the next reference to the
matter would perhaps be tending to a more alluring hope.

“To-morrow,” a person has remarked in the hearing of this one, “I go
to the Stratford which is upon the Avon, and without a pause I shall
prostrate myself intellectually before the immortal Shakespeare’s tomb
and worship his unequalled memory.”

“The intention is benevolently conceived,” I remarked. “Yet has he no
descendants, this same Shakespeare, that the conciliation of his spirit
must be left to chance?”

When he assured me that this calamity had come about, I would have added
a richly-gilded brick from my store for transmission also, in the hope
that the neglected and capricious shadow would grant me an immunity from
its resentful attention, but the one in question raised a barrier of
dissent. If I wished to adorn a tomb, he added (evading the deeper
significance of the act), there was that of Goldsmith within its Temple,
upon which many impressionable maidens from across the Bitter Waters of
the West make it a custom to deposit chaplets of verses, in the hope
of seeing the offering chronicled in the papers; and in the Open Space
called Trafalgar there were the images of a great captain who led many
junks to victory and the Emperor of a former dynasty, where doubtless
the matter could be arranged; but the surrounding had by this time
become too involved, and this person had no alternative but to smile
symmetrically and reply that his words were indeed opals falling from a
topaz basin.

Later in the day, being desirous of becoming instructed more definitely,
I addressed myself to a venerable person who makes clean the passage of
the way at a point not far distant.

“If you have no sons to extend your industrious line,” I said, when he
had revealed this fact to me, “why do you not adopt one to that end?”

With narrow-minded covetousness, he replied that nowadays he had enough
to do to keep himself, and that it would be more reasonable to get some
one to adopt HIM.

“But,” I exclaimed, ignoring this ill-timed levity, “who, when you
have Passed Beyond, will worship you and transmit to your spirit the
necessities of life?”

“Governor,” he replied, using the term of familiar dignity, “I’ve made
shift without being worshipped for five and sixty years, and it worries
me a sight more to know who will transmit to my body the necessities of
life until I HAVE Passed Beyond.”

“The final consequences of your self-opinionated carelessness,” this
person continued, “will be that your neglected and unprovided shadow,
finding itself no longer acceptable to the society of the better
class demons, will wander forth, and allying itself in despair to the
companionship of a band of outcasts like itself, will be driven to dwell
in unclean habitations and to subsist on the uncertain bounty of the
charitable.”

“Very likely,” replied the irredeemable person before me. “I can’t help
its troubles. I have to do all that myself as it is.”

Doubtless this fanaticism contains the secret of the ease with which
these barbarians have possessed themselves of the greater part of the
earth, and have even planted their assertive emblems on one or two spots
in our own Flowery Kingdom. What, O my esteemed parent, what can a brave
but devout and demon-fearing nation do when opposed to a people who are
quite prepared to die without first leaving an adequate posterity to
tend their shrines and offer incense? Assuredly, as a neighbouring
philosopher once had occasion to remark, using for his purpose a
metaphor so technically-involved that I must leave the interpretation
until we meet, “It may be war, but it isn’t cricket.”

The inevitable outcome, naturally, is that the Island must be the
wandering-place of myriads of spirits possessing no recognised standing,
and driven by want--having none to transmit them offerings--to the most
degraded subterfuges. It is freely admitted that there is scarcely an
ancient building not the abode of one or more of these abandoned demons,
doubtless well-disposed in the first instance, and capable of becoming
really beneficent Forces until they were driven to despair by obstinate
neglect. A society of very honourable persons (to which this one has
unobtrusively contributed a gift), exists for the purpose of searching
out the most distressing and meritorious cases among them, and removing
them, where possible, to a more congenial spot. The remarkable fact,
to this person’s mind, is, that with the air and every available
space around absolutely packed with demons (as certainly must be the
prevailing state of things), the manifestations of their malignity and
vice are, if anything, rather less evident here than in our own favoured
country, where we do all in our power to satisfy their wants.

That same evening I found myself seated next to a maiden of
prepossessing vivacity, who was spoken of as being one of a kindred
but not identical race. Filled with the incredible profanity of those
around, and hoping to find among a nation so alluringly high-spirited
a more congenial elevation of mind, I at length turned to her and said,
“Do not regard the question as one of unworthy curiosity, for this
person’s inside is white and funereal with his fears; but do you, of
your allied race, worship your ancestors?”

The maiden spent a moment in conscientious thought. “No, Mr. Kong,” she
replied, with a most commendable sigh of unfeigned regret, “I can’t say
that we do. I guess it’s because we’re too new. Mine, now, only go back
two generations, and they were mostly in lard. If they were old and
baronial it might be different, but I can’t imagine myself worshipping
an ancestor in lard.” (This doubtless refers to some barbaric method of
embalming.)

“And your wide and enlightened countrymen?” I asked, unable to restrain
a passion of pure-bred despair. “Do they also so regard the obligation?”

“I am afraid so,” replied the maiden, with an honourable indication
towards my emotion. “But of course when a girl marries into the European
aristocracy, she and all her folk worship her husband’s ancestors, until
every one about is fairly dizzy with the subject.”

It is largely owing to the graceful and virtuous conversation of these
lesser ones that this person’s knowledge of the exact position which
the ceremonial etiquette of the country demands on various occasions is
becoming so proficiently enlarged. It is true that they of my own sex do
not hesitate to inquire with penetrating assiduousness into certain of
the manners and customs of our land, but these for the most part do
not lead to a conversation in any way profitable to my discreeter
understanding. Those of the inner chamber, on the other hand, while
not scrupling to question me on the details of dress, the braiding and
gumming of the hair, the style and variety of the stalls of merchants,
the wearing of jade, gold, and crystal ornaments and flowers about
the head, smoking, and other matters affecting our lesser ones, very
magnanimously lead my contemplation back to a more custom-established
topic if by any hap in my ambitious ignorance I outstep it.

In such a manner it chanced on a former occasion that I sat side by side
with a certain maiden awaiting the return of others who had withdrawn
for a period. The season was that of white rains, and the fire being
lavishly extended about the grate we had harmoniously arranged ourselves
before it, while this person, at the repeated and explicit encouragement
of the maiden, spoke openly of such details of the inner chamber as he
has already indicated.

“Is it true, Mr. Ho” (thus the maiden, being unacquainted with the
actual facts, consistently addressed me), “that ladies’ feet are
relentlessly compressed until they finally assume the proportions and
appearance of two bulbs?” and as she spoke she absent-mindedly regarded
her own slippers, which were out-thrust somewhat to receive the action
of the fire.

“It is a matter which cannot reasonably be denied,” I replied; “and
it is doubtless owing to this effect that they are designated ‘Golden
Lilies.’ Yet when this observance has been slowly and painfully
accomplished, the extremities in question are not less small but
infinitely less graceful than the select and naturally-formed pair which
this person sees before him.” And at the ingeniously-devised compliment
(which, not to become large-headed in self-imagination, it must be
admitted was revealed to me as available for practically all occasions
by the really invaluable Quang-Tsun), I bowed unremittingly.

“O, Mr. Ho!” exclaimed the maiden, and paused abruptly at the sound of
her words, as though they were inept.

“In many other ways a comparison equally irreproachable to the exalted
being at my side might be sought out,” I continued, suddenly forming
the ill-destined judgment that I was no less competent than the more
experienced Quang-Tsun to contrive delicate offerings of speech. “Their
hair is rope like in its lack of spontaneous curve, their eyes as
deficient in lustre as a half-shuttered window; their hands are
exceedingly inferior in colour, and both on the left side, as it may be
expressed; their legs--” but at this point the maiden drew herself so
hastily into herself that I had no alternative but to conclude that
unless I reverted in some way the enterprise was in peril of being
inharmoniously conducted.

“Mr. Ho,” said the maiden, after contemplating her inward thoughts for
a moment, “you are a foreigner, and you cannot be expected to know by
instinct what may and what may not be openly expressed in this country.
Therefore, although the obligation is not alluring, I think it kinder
to tell you that the matters which formed the subject of your last words
are never to be referred to.”

At this rebuke I again bowed persistently, for it did not appear
reasonable to me that I could in any other way declare myself without
violating the imposed command.

“Not only are they never openly referred to,” continued the maiden,
who in spite of the declared no allurement of the subject did not seem
disposed to abandon it at once, “but among the most select they are,
by unspoken agreement, regarded as ‘having no actual existence,’ as you
yourself would say.”

“Yet,” protested this person, somewhat puzzled, “to one who has
witnessed the highly-achieved attitudes of those within your Halls of
Harmony, and in an unyielding search for knowledge has addressed himself
even to the advertisement pages of the ladies’ papers--”

The maiden waved her hand magnanimously. “In your land, as you have told
me, there are many things, not really existing, which for politeness you
assume to be. In a like but converse manner this is to be so regarded.”

I thanked her voluminously. “The etiquette of this country is as
involved as the spoken tongue,” I said, “for both are composed chiefly
of exceptions to a given rule. It was formerly impressed upon this
person, as a guiding principle, that that which is unseen is not to be
discussed; yet it is not held in disrepute to allude to so intimate and
secluded an organ as the heart, for no further removed than yesterday he
heard the deservedly popular sea-lieutenant in the act of declaring to
you, upon his knees, that you were utterly devoid of such a possession.”

At this inoffensively-conveyed suggestion, the fire opposite had all the
appearance of suddenly reflecting itself into the maiden’s face with a
most engaging concentration, while at the same time she stamped her foot
in ill-concealed rage.

“You’ve been listening at the door!” she cried impetuously, “and I shall
never forgive you.”

“To no extent,” I declared hastily (for although I had indeed been
listening at the door, it appeared, after the weight which she set
upon the incident, more honourable that I should deny it in order to
conciliate her mind). “It so chanced that for the moment this person
had forgotten whether the handle he was grasping was of the push-out or
turn-in variety, and in the involvement a few words of no particular or
enduring significance settled lightly upon his perception.

“In that case,” she replied in high-souled liberality, while her eyes
scintillated towards me with a really all-overpowering radiance, “I will
forgive you.”

“We have an old but very appropriate saying, ‘To every man the voice of
one maiden carries further than the rolling of thunder,’” I remarked
in a significantly restrained tone; for, although conscious that the
circumstance was becoming more menace-laden than I had any previous
intention, I found myself to be incapable of extrication. “Florence--”

“Oh,” she exclaimed quickly, raising her polished hand with an
undeniable gesture of reproof, “you must not call me by my christian
name, Mr. Ho.”

“Yet,” replied this person, with a confessedly stubborn inelegance, “you
call me by the name of Ho.”

Her eyes became ox-like in an utter absence of almond outline. “Yes,”
 she said gazing, “but that--that is not your christian name, is it?”

“In a position of speaking--this one being as a matter of fact a
discreditable follower of the sublime Confucius--it may be so regarded,”
 I answered, “inasmuch as it is the milk-name of childhood.”

“But you always put it last,” she urged.

“Assuredly,” I replied. “Being irrevocably born with the family name of
Kong, it is thought more reasonable that that should stand first. After
that, others are attached as the various contingencies demand it, as Ho
upon participating in the month-age feast, the book-name of Tsin at a
later period, Paik upon taking a degree, and so forth.”

“I am very sorry, Mr. Kong,” said the maiden, adding, with what at
the time certainly struck this person as shallow-witted prejudice. “Of
course it is really quite your own fault for being so tospy-turvily
arranged in every way. But, to return to the subject, why should not one
speak of one’s heart?”

“Because,” replied this person, colouring deeply, and scarcely able to
control his unbearable offence that so irreproachably-moulded a creature
should openly refer to the detail, “because it is a gross and unrefined
particular, much more internal and much less pleasantly-outlined
than those extremities whose spoken equivalent shall henceforth be an
abandoned word from my lips.”

“But, in any case, it is not the actual organ that one infers,”
 protested the maiden. “As the seat of the affections, passions, virtues,
and will, it is the conventional emblem of every thought and emotion.”

“By no means,” I cried, forgetting in the face of so heterodox an
assertion that it would be well to walk warily at every point. “That is
the stomach.”

“Ah!” exclaimed the maiden, burying her face in a gracefully-perfumed
remnant of lace, to so overwhelming a degree that for the moment I
feared she might become involved in the dizzy falling. “Never, by any
mischance, use that word again the society of the presentable, Mr.
Kong.”

“The ceremonial usage of my own land of the Heavenly Dynasty is
proverbially elaborate,” I said, with a gesture of self-abasement, “but
in comparison with yours it may be regarded as an undeviating walk when
opposed to a stately and many-figured dance. Among the company of the
really excessively select (in which must ever be included the one whom
I am now addressing), it becomes difficult for an outcast of my
illimitable obtuseness to move to one side or the other without putting
his foot into that.”

“Oh no,” exclaimed the maiden, in fragrant encouragement, “I think you
are getting on very nicely, Mr. Kong, and one does not look for absolute
conformance from a foreigner--especially one who is so extremely
foreign. If I can help you with anything--of course I could not even
speak as I have done to an ordinary stranger, but with one of a distant
race it seems different--if I can tell you anything that will save
you--”

“You are all-exalted,” I replied, with seemly humility, “and virtue and
wisdom press out your temples on either side. Certainly, since I have
learned that the heart is so poetically regarded, I have been assailed
by a fear lest other organs which I have hitherto despised might be used
in a similar way. Now, as regards liver--”

“It is only used with bacon,” replied the maiden, rising abruptly.

“Kidneys?” suggested this person diffidently, really anxious to detain
her footsteps, although from her expression it did not rest assured that
the incident was taking an actually auspicious movement.

“I don’t think you need speak of those except at breakfast,” she said;
“but I hear the others returning, and I must really go to dress for
dinner.”

Among the barbarians many keep books wherein to inscribe their deep and
beautiful thoughts. This person had therefore provided himself with
one also, and, drawing it forth, he now added to a page of many other
interesting compositions: “Maidens of immaculate refinement do not
hesitate to admit before a person of a different sex that they are on
the point of changing their robes. The liver is in some intricate way
an emblem representing bacon, or together with it the two stand for
a widely differing analogy. Among those of the highest exclusiveness
kidneys are never alluded to after the tenth gong-stroke of the
morning.”

With a sincerely ingrained trust that the scenes of dignity, opulence,
and wisdom, set forth in these superficial letters, are not unsettling
your intellect and causing you to yearn for a fuller existence.

KONG HO.




LETTER VI


 Concerning this person’s well-sustained efforts to discover
 further demons. The behaviour of those invoked on two
 occasions.


VENERATED SIRE,--In an early letter I made some reference to a variety
of demon invoked by certain of the barbarians. As this matter aroused
your congenial interest, I have since privately bent my mind incessantly
to the discovery of others; but this has been by no means easy, for,
touching the more intimate details of the subject, the barbarians
frequently maintain a narrow-minded suspicion. Many whom I have
approached feign to become amused or have evaded a deliberate answer
under the subterfuge of a jest; yet, whenever I would have lurked by
night in their temples or among the enclosed spaces of their tombs to
learn more, at a given signal one in authority has approached me with
anxiety and mistrust engraved upon his features, and, disregarding my
unassuming protest that I would remain alone in a contemplative reverie,
has signified that so devout an exercise is contrary to their written
law.

On one occasion only did this person seem to hold himself poised on the
very edge of a fuller enlightenment. This was when, in the venerable
company of several benevolent persons, he was being taken from place to
place to see the more important buildings, and to observe the societies
of artificers labouring at their crafts. The greater part of the day had
already been spent in visiting temples, open spaces reserved to children
and those whose speech, appearance, and general manner of behaving
make it desirable that they should be set apart from the contact of the
impressionable, halls containing relics and emblems of the past,
places of no particular size or attraction but described as being of
unparalleled historic interest, and the stalls of the more reputable
venders of merchandise.

Doubtless, with observing so many details of a conflicting nature,
this person’s discriminating faculties had become obscured, but towards
evening he certainly understood that we sought the company of an
assembly of those who had been selected from all the Empire to pronounce
definitely upon matters of supreme import. The building before which our
chariot stopped had every appearance of being worthy of so exceptional a
gathering, and with a most affluent joy that I should at last be able to
glean a decisive pronouncement, I evaded those who had accompanied
me, and, mingling self-reliantly with the throng inside, I quickly
surrounded myself with many of the wisest-looking, and begged that they
would open their heads freely and express their innermost opinions upon
the subject of demons of all kinds.

Although I had admittedly hoped that these persons would not conceal
themselves behind the wings of epigram or intangible prevarication, I
was far from being prepared for the candour with which they greeted me,
and although by long usage I am reasonably unconcerned at the proximity
of any of our own recognised genii, it is not to be denied that my
organs of ferocity grew small and unstable at the revelations.

From their words it appeared that the spot on which we stood had
long been the recognised centre and meeting-place for every class of
abandoned and objectionable spirit of the universe. Not only this, but
several of the persons who had gathered around were confidently pointed
out as the earthly embodiment of various diabolical Forces, while others
cheerfully admitted that they themselves were the shadows of certain
illustrious ones who had long Passed Above, and all united in declaring
that those who moved among them wearing the distinction of a dark blue
uniform were Evil Beings of a most ghoulish and repulsive type. Indeed,
as I looked more closely, I could see that not only those pointed out,
but all standing around, had expressions immeasurably more in
keeping with a band of outcast spirits than suggestive of an assembly
representing wisdom and dignified ease. At that moment, however, a most
inelegant movement was caused by one suddenly declaring that he
had recognised this one who is inscribing his experiences to be the
apparition of a certain great reformer who during the period of his
ordinary existence had received the name of Guy Fawkes, and amid a
tumult of overwhelming acclamation a proposal was raised that I
should be carried around in triumph and afterwards initiated into
the observance of a time-honoured custom. Although it had now become
doubtful to what end the adventure was really tending, this person
would have submitted himself agreeably to the participation had not the
blue-apparelled band cleft their way into the throng just as I was about
to be borne off in triumph, and forming themselves into a ringed
barrier around me they presently succeeded in rearranging the contending
elements and in restoring me to the society of my friends. To these
persons they complained with somewhat unreasoning acrimony that I
had been exciting the inmates into a state of rebellion with wild
imaginings, and for the first time I then began to understand that an
important error had been perpetrated by some one, and that instead of
being a meeting-place for those upholding the wisdom and authority
of the country, the building was in reality an establishment for the
mentally defective and those of treacherous instincts.

For some time after this occurrence I failed to regard the subject of
demons and allied Forces in any but a spirit of complete no enthusiasm,
but more recently my interest and research have been enlarged by the
zeal and supernatural conversation of a liberal-minded person who
sought my prosaic society with indefatigable persistence. When we had
progressed to such a length that the one might speak of affairs without
the other at once interposing that he himself had also unfortunately
come out quite destitute of money, this stranger, who revealed to me
that his name was Glidder, but that in the company of a certain chosen
few he was known intimately as the Keeper of the Salograma, approached
me confidentially, and inquired whether we of our Central Kingdom were
in the habit of receiving manifestations from the spirits of those who
had Passed Beyond.

At the unassumed ingenuousness of this remark I suffered my
impassiveness to relax, as I replied with well-established pride that
although a country which neglected its ancestors might doubtless be
able to produce more of the ordinary or graveyard spectres, we were
unapproachable for the diverse forms and malignant enmity of our
apparitions. Of invisible beings alone, I continued tolerantly, we
had the distinction of being harassed by upwards of seven hundred
clearly-defined varieties, while the commoner inflictions of demons,
shades, visions, warlocks, phantoms, sprites, imps, phenomena, ghosts,
and reflections passed almost without comment; and touching our admitted
national speciality of dragons, the honour of supremacy had never been
questioned.

At this, the agreeable person said that the pleasure he derived from
meeting me was all-excelling, and that I must certainly accompany him to
a meeting-place of this same chosen few the following evening, when,
by the means of sacred expedients, they hoped to invoke the presence
of some departed spirits, and perchance successfully raise a tangible
vision or two. To so fair-minded a proposal I held myself acquiescently,
and then inquired where the meeting-place in question was destined
to be--whether in a ruined and abandoned sanctuary, or upon some
precipitous spot of desolation.

The inquiry was gracefully intended, but a passing cloud of unworthy
annoyance revealed itself upon the upper part of the other’s expression
as he replied, “We, the true seekers, despise theatrical accessories,
and, as a matter of act, I couldn’t well get away from the office in
time to go anywhere far. To-morrow we meet at my place in the Camden
Road. It’s only a three-half-penny tram stage from the Euston and
Tottenham Court corner, so it couldn’t be much more convenient for you.”
 He thereupon gave me an inscribed fragment of paper and mentioned the
appointed hour.

“I’ll tell you why I am particularly anxious for you to come to-morrow,”
 he said as we were each departing from one another. “Pash--he’s the
Reader of the Veda among us--and his people have got hold of a Greek
woman (they SAY she is a princess, of course), who can do a lot of
things with flowers and plate glass. They are bringing her for the first
time to-morrow, and it struck me that if I have YOU there already when
they arrive--you’ll come in your national costume by the way?--it will
be a considerable set-off. Since his daughter was presented to the
duchess at the opening of a bazaar, there has been no holding Pash; why
he was ever elected Reader of the Books, I don’t know. Er--we have had
scoffers sometimes, but I trust I may rely upon you not to laugh at
anything you may not happen to agree with?”

With conscientious dignity I replied that I had only really laughed
seven times in my life, and therefore the entertainment was one which
I was not likely to embark upon hastily or with inadequate cause. He
immediately expressed a seemly regret that the detail had been spoken,
and again assuring him that at the stated hour I would present myself
at the house bearing the symbol engraved upon the card, we definitely
parted.

That, as a matter of fact, I did not so present myself at the exact
hour, chiefly concerns the uncouth and arbitrary-minded charioteer who
controlled the movements of the vehicle to which the one whom I was
seeking had explicitly referred; for at an angle in the road he suffered
the horses to draw us aside into a path which did not correspond to the
engraved signs upon the card, nor by any word of persuasion could he be
prevailed upon to return.

Thus, without any possible reproach upon the manner in which I was
conducting the enterprise, it came about that by the time I reached the
spot indicated, all those persons who had been spoken of as constituting
a chosen band were assembled, and with them the barbarian princess.
Nevertheless, this person was irreproachably greeted, and the maiden
indicated even spoke a few words to him in an outside tongue. Being
necessarily unacquainted with the import of the remark I spread out my
hands with a sign of harmonious sympathy and smiled agreeably, whereat
she appeared to receive an added esteem from the faces of those around
(excluding those directly of the House of Glidder), and was thereby
encouraged to speak similarly at intervals, this person each time
replying in a like fashion.

“Is he then a Guide of the Way, also, princess?” said the one Pash, who
had noted the occurrence; to which the maiden replied, “To a degree, yet
lacking the Innermost Mysteries.”

Presently it was announced that all things were fittingly prepared in
another chamber. Here, upon a table of polished wood, stood on the one
side a round stone with certain markings, a group of inscribed books,
and various other emblems; and on the other side a bowl of water, a
sphere of crystal, pieces of unwritten parchment, and behind all, and at
a distance away, a sheet of transparent glass, greater in height than
an ordinary person and as wide. When all were seated--the one who had
enticed me among them placing himself before the stone, the person
Pash guarding the books, the barbarian princess being surrounded by her
symbols and alone in a self-imposed solitude, and the others at various
points--the lights were subdued and the appearances awaited.

It would scarcely be respectful, O my enlightened father, to take up
your well-spent leisure by a too prolific account of the matters which
followed, they being in no way dissimilar from the manifestations
by which the uninitiated little ones of Yuen-ping are wont to amuse
themselves and pass the winter evenings. From time to time harmonious
sounds could be plainly detected, flowers and branches of wood were
scattered sparsely here and there, persons claimed that passing objects
had touched their faces, and misshapen forms of smoke-like density
(which some confidently recognised as the outlines of departed ones whom
they had known), revealed themselves against the glass. When this had
been accomplished, the lights were recalled, and the barbarian maiden,
sinking into a condition of languor, announced and foretold events and
happenings upon which she was consulted, sometimes replying by spoken
words, at others suffering her hand to trace them lightly upon the
parchment sheets. Thus, to an inquirer it was announced that one, Aunt
Mary, in the Upper Air, was well and happy, though undeniably pained at
the action of Cousin William in the matter of the freehold houses, and
more than sceptical how his marriage would turn out. Another was advised
that although the interest on Consols was admittedly lower than that
anticipated by those controlling the destines of a new venture entitled,
The Great Rosy Dawn Gold Mine Development Syndicate, and the name
certainly less poetically inspiring, the advising spirits were of the
opinion that the former enterprise would prove the more stable of the
two, and, in any case, they recommended the person in question to begin
by placing not more than half of her life’s savings into the mine.
The family of the House of Pash was assured that beneficent spirits
surrounded them at every turn, and that their good deeds were not
suffered to fall unfruitfully to the ground; while many bearing the name
of Glidder, on the other hand, were reproved by one who had known them
in infancy for the offences of jealousy, ostentation, vain thoughts,
shallowness of character, and the like.

At length, revered, as there seemed to be no reasonable indication of
any barbarian phantom of weight or authority appearing--nothing,
indeed, beyond what a person in our country, of no admitted skill, would
accomplish in the penetrating light of day with two others holding his
hands, and a third reposing upon his head, I formed the perhaps immature
judgment that the one to whom I was indebted for the entertainment would
be suffering a grievous frustration of his hopes and a diminution of his
outward authority. Therefore, without sufficient consideration of the
restricted surroundings, as it afterwards appeared, I threw myself
into a retrospective vision, and floating unencumbered through space,
I sought for Kwan Kiang-ti, the Demon of the Waters, upon whom I might
fittingly call, as I was given into his keeping by the ceremony of
spirit-adoption at an early age. Meeting an influence which I recognised
to be an indication of his presence, in the vicinity of the Eighth
Region, I obsequiously entreated that he would reveal himself without
delay, and then, convinced of his sympathetic intervention, I suffered
my spirit to recall itself, and revived into the condition of an
ordinary existence.

“We have among us this evening, my friends,” the one Pash was saying,
“a very remarkable lady--if I may use so democratic a term in the
connection--to whom the limits of Time and Space are empty words, and
before whose supreme Will the most portentous Forces of Occult Nature
mutely confess themselves her attending slaves--” But at that moment
the rolling drums of Kiang-ti’s thunder drowned his words, although he
subsequently raised his voice above it to entreat that any knives or
other articles of a bright and attractive kind should at once be removed
to a place of safety.

Heralded by these continuous sounds, and accompanied by innumerable
flashes of lightning, the genius presently manifested himself, leisurely
developing out of the air around. He appeared in his favourite guise of
an upright dragon, his scales being arranged in rows of nine each way,
a pearl showing within his throat, and upon his head the wooden bar. The
lights were extinguished incapably by the rain which fell continually in
his presence, but from his body there proceeded a luminous breath which
sufficiently revealed the various incidents.

“Kong Ho,” said this opportune vision, speaking with a voice like the
beating of a brass gong, “the course you have adopted is an unusual one,
but the weight and regularity of your offerings have merit in my eyes.
Nevertheless, if your invocation is only the outcome of a shallow vanity
or a profane love of display, nothing can save you from a painful death.
Speak now, fully and without evasion, and fear nothing.”

“Amiable Being,” said this person, kow-towing profoundly, “the matter
was designed to the end only that your incomparable versatility might
be fittingly displayed. These barbarians sought vainly to raise phantoms
capable of any useful purpose, whereupon I, jealous of your superior
omnipotence, judged it would be an unseemly neglect not to inform you of
the opportunity.”

“It is well,” said the demon affably. “All doubt in the matter shall
now be set at rest. Could any more convincing act be found than that
I should breath upon these barbarians and reduce them instantly to a
scattering of thin white ashes?”

“Assuredly it would be a conclusive testimony,” I replied; “yet in
that case consider how inadequate a witness could be borne to your
enlightened condescension, when none would be left but one to whom the
spoken language of this Island is more in the nature of a trap than a
comfortable vehicle.”

“Your reasoning is profound, Kong Ho,” he replied, “yet abundant
proof shall not be wanting.” With these words he raised his hand, and
immediately the air became filled with an overwhelming shower of
those productions with which Kwan Kiang-ti’s name is chiefly
associated--shells and pebbles of all kinds, lotus and other roots from
the river banks, weeds from seas of greater depths, fish of interminable
variety from both fresh and bitter waters, all falling in really
embarrassing abundance, and mingled with an incessant rain of sand and
water. In the midst of this the demon suddenly passed away, striking the
table as he went, so that it was scarred with the brand of a five-clawed
hand, shattering all the objects upon it (excepting the stone and
the books, which he doubtless regarded as sacred to some extent), and
leaving the room involved in a profound darkness.

“For the love av the saints--for the love av the saints, save us from
the yellow devils!” exclaimed a voice from the spot where last the
barbarian princess had reclined, and upon this person going to her
assistance with lights it was presently revealed that she alone had
remained seated, the others having all assembled themselves beneath the
table in spite of the incapability of the space at their disposal. Most
of the weightier evidences of Kwan Kiang-ti’s majestic presence had
faded away, though the table retained the print of his impressive hand,
many objects remained irretrievably torn apart, and in a distant corner
of the room an insignificant heap of shells and seaweed still lingered.
From the floor covering a sprinkling of the purest Fuh-chow sand rose
at every step, the salt dew of the Tung-Hai still dropped from
the surroundings, and, at a later period, a shore crab was found
endeavouring to make its escape undetected.

Convinced that the success of the manifestation would have enlarged
the one Glidder’s esteem towards me to an inexpressible degree, I now
approached him with words of self-deprecation ready on my tongue, but
before he spoke I became aware, from the nature of his glance, that
the provision had been unnecessary, for already his face had begun to
assume, to a most distended amount, the expression which I had long
recognised as a synonym that some detail had been regarded at a
different angle from that anticipated.

“May I ask,” he began in a somewhat heavily-laden voice, after he had
assured himself that the person who was speaking was himself, and his
external attributes unchanged, “May I ask, sir” (and at this title,
which is untranslatable in its many-sided significance when technically
employed, I recognised that all complimentary intercourse might be
regarded as having closed), “whether you accept the responsibility of
these proceedings?”

“Touching the appearance which has so essentially contributed to the
success of the occasion, it is undeniably due to this one’s foresight,”
 I replied modestly.

“Then let me tell you, sir, that I consider it an outrage--a dastardly
outrage.”

“Yet,” protested this person with retiring assertiveness, “the expressed
object of the ceremony, as it stood before my intelligence, was for the
set purpose of invoking spirits and raising certain visions.”

“Spirits!” exclaimed the one before me with an accent of concentrated
aversion; “yes, spirits; impalpable, civilised, genuine spirits, who
manifest themselves through recognised media, and are conformable to the
usages of the best drawing-room society--yes. But not demons, sir; not
Chinese devils in the Camden Road--no. Truth and Light at any cost, not
paganism. It’s perfectly scandalous. Look at the mahogany table--ruined;
look at the wall-paper--conventional mackerels with a fishing-net
background, new this spring--soused; look at the Brussels carpet,
seventeen six by twenty-five--saturated!”

“I quite agree with you, Mr. Glidder,” here interposed the individual
Pash. “I was watching you, sir, closely the whole time, and I have my
suspicions about how it was done. I don’t know whether Mr. Glidder
has any legal redress, but I should certainly advise him to see his
solicitors to-morrow, and in the meantime--”

“He is my guest,” exclaimed the one whose hospitality I was enjoying,
“and while he is beneath my roof he is sacred.”

“But I do not think that it would be kind to detain him any longer in
his wet things,” said another of the household, with pointed malignity,
and accepting this as an omen of departure, I withdrew myself, bowing
repeatedly, but offering no closer cordiality.

“Through a torn sleeve one drops a purse of gold,” it is well said; and
as if to prove to a deeper end that misfortune is ever double-handed,
this incapable being, involved in thoughts of funereal density, bent
his footsteps to an inaccurate turning, and after much wandering was
compelled to pass the night upon a desolate heath--but that would be the
matter of another narrative.

With an insidious doubt whether, after all, the far-seeing Kwan
Kiang-ti’s first impulse would not have been the most satisfactory
conclusion to the enterprise.

KONG HO.




LETTER VII


 Concerning warfare, both as waged by ourselves and by a
 nation devoid of true civilisation. The aged man and the
 meeting and the parting of our ways. The instance of the one
 who expressed emotion by leaping.


VENERATED SIRE,--You are omniscient, but I cannot regard the fear which
you express in your beautifully-written letter, bearing the sign of the
eleventh day of the seventh moon, as anything more than the imaginings
prompted by a too-lavish supper of your favourite shark’s fin and peanut
oil. Unless the dexterously-elusive attributes of the genial-spoken
persons high in office at Pekin have deteriorated contemptibly
since this one’s departure, it is quite impossible for our great
and enlightened Empire to be drawn into a conflict with the northern
barbarians whom you indicate, against our will. When the matter becomes
urgent, doubtless a prince of the Imperial line will loyally suffer
himself to Pass Above, and during the period of ceremonial mourning
for so pure and exalted an official it would indeed be an unseemly
desecration to engage in any public business. If this failed, and an
ultimatum were pressed with truly savage contempt for all that is sacred
and refined, it might be well next to consider the health even of the
sublime Emperor himself (or, perhaps better, that of the select and
ever-present Dowager Empress); but should the barbarians still advance,
and, setting the usages of civilised warfare at defiance, threaten an
engagement in the midst of this unparalleled calamity, there will be no
alternative but to have a formidable rebellion in the Capital. All
the barbarian powers will then assemble as usual, and in the general
involvement none dare move alone, and everything will have to be
regarded as being put back to where it was before. It is well said, “The
broken vessel can never be made whole, but it may be delicately arranged
so that another shall displace it.”

These barbarians, less resourceful in device, have only recently emerged
from a conflict into which they do not hesitate to admit they were drawn
despite their protests. Such incompetence is characteristic of their
methods throughout. Not in any way disguising their purpose, they
at once sent out an army of those whom could be the readiest seized,
certainly furnishing them with weapons, charms to use in case of
emergency, and three-coloured standards (their adversaries adopting
a white banner to symbolise the conciliation of their attitude, and
displaying both freely in every extremity), but utterly neglecting to
teach them the arts of painting their bodies with awe-inspiring forms,
of imitating the cries of wild animals as they attacked, of clashing
their weapons together with menacing vigour, or any of the recognised
artifices by which terror may be struck into the ranks of an awaiting
foeman. The result was that which the prudent must have foreseen. The
more accomplished enemy, without exposing themselves to any unnecessary
inconvenience, gained many advantages by their intrepid power of
dissimulation--arranging their garments and positions in such a way that
they had the appearance of attacking when in reality they were effecting
a prudent retreat; rapidly concealing themselves among the earth on the
approach of an overwhelming force; becoming openly possessed with the
prophetic vision of an assured final victory whenever it could be no
longer concealed that matters were becoming very desperate indeed; and
gaining an effective respite when all other ways of extrication were
barred against them by the stratagem of feigning that they were other
than those whom they had at first appeared to be.

In the meantime the adventure was not progressing pleasantly for those
chiefly concerned at home. With the earliest tidings of repulse it was
discovered that in the haste of embarkation the wrong persons had been
sent, all those who were really the fittest to command remaining behind,
and many of these did not hesitate to write to the printed papers,
resolutely admitting that they themselves were in every way better
qualified to bring the expedition to a successful end, at the same time
skilfully pointing out how the disasters which those in the field
had incurred could easily have been avoided by acting in a precisely
contrary manner.

In the emergency the most far-seeing recommended a more unbending policy
of extermination. Among these, one in particular, a statesman bearing
an illustrious name of two-edged import, distinguished himself by the
liberal broad-mindedness of his opinions, and for the time he even did
not flinch from making himself excessively unpopular by the wide
and sweeping variety of his censure. “We are confessedly a barbarian
nation,” fearlessly declared this unprejudiced person (who, although
entitled by hereditary right to carry a banner on the field of battle,
with patriotic self-effacement preferred to remain at home and encourage
those who were fighting by pointing out their inadequacy to the task and
the extreme unlikelihood of their ever accomplishing it), “and in order
to achieve our purpose speedily it is necessary to resort to the methods
of barbarism.” The most effective measure, as he proceeded to explain
with well-thought-out detail, would be to capture all those least
capable of resistance, concentrate them into a given camp, and then
at an agreed signal reduce the entire assembly to what he termed, in
a passage of high-minded eloquence, “a smoking hecatomb of women and
children.”

His advice was pointed with a crafty insight, for not only would such a
course have brought the stubborn enemy to a realisation of the weakness
of their position and thus paved the way to a dignified peace, but by
the act itself few would have been left to hand down the tradition of
a relentless antagonism. Yet with incredible obtuseness his advice was
ignored and he himself was referred to at the time by those who regarded
the matter from a different angle, with a scarcely-veiled dislike, which
towards many of his followers took the form of building materials and
other dissentient messages whenever they attempted to raise their voices
publicly. As an inevitable result the conquest of the country took
years, where it would have been moons had the more truly humane policy
been adopted, commerce and the arts languished, and in the end so little
spoil was taken that it was more common to meet six mendicants wearing
the honourable embellishment of the campaign than to see one captured
slave maiden offered for sale in the market places--indeed, even to this
day the deficiency is clearly admitted and openly referred to as The
Great “Domestic” Problem.

At various times during my residence here I have been filled with a
most acute gratification when the words of those around have seemed to
indicate that they recognised the undoubted superiority of the laws and
institutions of our enlightened country. Sometimes, it is true, upon a
more detailed investigation of the incident, it has presently appeared
that either I had misunderstood the exact nature of their sentiments
or they had slow-wittedly failed to grasp the precise operation of the
enactment I had described; but these exceptions are clearly the outcome
of their superficial training, and do not affect the fact my feeble and
frequently even eccentric arguments are at length certainly moving the
more intelligent into an admission of what constitutes true justice
and refinement. It is not to be denied that here and there exists a
prejudice against our customs even in the minds of the studious; but as
this is invariably the shadow of misconception, it has frequently been
my sympathetic privilege to promote harmony by means of the inexorable
logic of fact and reason. “But are not your officials uncompromisingly
opposed to the freedom of the Press?” said one who conversed with me on
the varying phases of the two countries, and knowing that in his eyes
this would constitute an unendurable offence, I at once appeased his
mind. “By no means,” I replied; “if anything, the exact contrary is
the case. As a matter of reality, of course, there is no Press now, the
all-seeing Board of Censors having wisely determined that it was not
stimulating to the public welfare; but if such an institution was
permitted to exist you may rest genially assured that nothing could
exceed the lenient toleration which all in office would extend towards
it.” A similar instance of malicious inaccuracy is widely spoken of
regarding our lesser ones. “Is it really a fact, Mr. Kong,” exclaimed a
maiden of magnanimous condescension, to this person recently, “that
we poor women are despised in your country, and that among the
working-classes female children are even systematically abandoned as
soon as they are born?” Suffering my features to express amusement at
this unending calumny, I indicated my violent contempt towards the one
who had first uttered it. “So far from despising them,” I continued,
with ingratiating gallantry, “we recognise that they are quite necessary
for the purposes of preparing our food, carrying weighty burdens,
and the like; and how grotesque an action would it be for poor but
affectionate parents to abandon one who in a few years’ time could be
sold at a really remunerative profit, this, indeed, being the principal
means of sustenance in many frugal families.”

On another occasion I had seated myself upon a wooden couch in one
of the open spaces about the outskirts of the city, when an aged man
chanced to pass by. Him I saluted with ceremonious politeness, on
account of his years and the venerable dignity of his beard. Thereupon
he approached near, and remarking affably that the afternoon was good
(though, to use no subtle evasion, it was very evil), he congenially sat
by my side and entered into familiar discourse.

“They say that in your part of the world we old grandfathers are
worshipped,” he said, after recounting to my ears all the most intimate
details of his existence from his youth upwards; “now, might that be
right?”

“Truly,” I replied. “It is the unchanging foundation of our system of
morality.”

“Ay, ay,” he admitted pleasantly. “We are a long way behind them
foreigners in everything. At the rate we’re going there won’t be any
trade nor work nor religion left in this country in another twenty
years. I often wish I had gone abroad when I was younger. And if I
had chanced upon your parts I should be worshipped, eh?” and at the
agreeable thought the aged man laughed in his throat with simple humour.

“Assuredly,” I replied; “--after you were dead.”

“Eh?” exclaimed the venerable person, checking the fountain of his mirth
abruptly at the word. “Dead! not before? Doesn’t--doesn’t that seem a
bit of a waste?”

“Such has been the observance from the time of unrecorded antiquity,” I
replied. “‘Obey parents, respect the old, loyally uphold the sovereign,
and worship ancestors.’”

“Well, well,” remarked the one beside me, “obedience and respect--that’s
something nowadays. And you make them do it?”

“Our laws are unflinching in their application,” I said. “No crime is
held to be more detestable than disrespect of those to whom we owe our
existence.”

“Quite right,” he agreed, “it’s a pleasure to hear it. It must be a
great country, yours; a country with a future, I should say. Now, about
that youngest lad of my son Henry’s--the one that drops pet lizards down
my neck, and threatened to put rat poison into his mother’s tea when she
wouldn’t take him to the Military Turneyment; what would they do to him
by your laws?”

“If the assertion were well sustained by competent witnesses,” I
replied, “it would probably be judged so execrable an offence, that
a new punishment would have to be contrived. Failing that, he would
certainly be wrapped round from head to foot in red-hot chains, and thus
exposed to public derision.”

“Ah, red-hot chains!” said the aged person, as though the words formed a
pleasurable taste upon his palate. “The young beggar! Well, he’d deserve
it.”

“Furthermore,” I continued, gratified at having found one who so
intelligently appreciated the deficiencies of his own country and the
unblemished perfection of ours, “his parents and immediate descendants,
if any should exist, would be submitted to a fate as inevitable but
slightly less contemptuous--slow compression, perchance; his parents
once removed (thus enclosing your venerable personality), and remoter
offsprings would be merely put to the sword without further ignominy,
and those of less kinship to about the fourth degree would doubtless
escape with branding and a reprimand.”

“Lordelpus!” exclaimed the patriarchal one, hastily leaping to the
extreme limit of the wooden couch, and grasping his staff into a
significant attitude of defence; “what’s that for?”

“Our system of justice is all-embracing,” I explained. “It is reasonably
held that in such a case either that there is an inherent strain of
criminality which must be eradicated at all hazard, or else that those
who are responsible for the virtuous instruction of the young have been
grossly neglectful of their duty. Whichever is the true cause, by this
unfailing method we reach the desired end, for, as our proverb aptly
says, ‘Do the wise pluck the weed and leave the roots to spread?’”

“It’s butchery, nothing short of Smithfield,” said the ancient person
definitely, rising and moving to a more remote distance as he spoke the
words, yet never for a moment relaxing the aggressive angle at which
he thrust out his staff before him. “You’re a bloodthirsty race in my
opinion, and when they get this door open in China that there’s so much
talk about, out you go through it, my lad, or old England will know
why.” With this narrow-minded imprecation on his lips he left me, not
even permitting me to continue expounding what would be the most likely
sentences meted out to the witnesses in the case, the dwellers of the
same street, and the members of the household with whom the youth in
question had contemplated forming an alliance.

Among the many contradictions which really almost seem purposely
arranged to entrap the unwary in this strangely under-side-up country,
is the fact that while the ennobled and those of high official rank are
courteous in their attitude and urbane--frequently even to the extent
of refusing money from those whom they have obliged, no matter how
privately pressed upon them--the low-caste and slavish are not only
deficient in obsequiousness, but are permitted to retort openly to those
who address them with fitting dignity. Here such a state of things
is too general to excite remark, but as instances are well called the
flowers of the tree of assertion, this person will set forth the manner
in which he was contumaciously opposed by an oblique-eyed outcast who
attended within the stall of one selling wrought gold, jewels, and
merchandise of the finer sort.

Being desirous of procuring a gift wherewith to propitiate a certain
maiden’s esteem, and seeing above a shop of varied attraction a
suspended sign emblematic of three times repeated gild abundance I drew
near, not doubting to find beneath so auspicious a token the fulfilment
of an honourable accommodation. Inside the window was displayed one
of the implements by which the various details of a garment are joined
together upon turning a wheel, hung about with an inscription setting
forth that it was esteemed at the price of two units of gold, nineteen
pieces of silver, and eleven and three-quarters of the brass cash of the
land, and judging that no more suitable object could be procured for the
purpose, I entered the shop, and desired the attending slave to submit
it to my closer scrutiny.

“Behold,” I exclaimed, when I had made a feint of setting the device
into motion (for it need not be concealed from you, O discreet one, that
I was really inadequate to the attempt, and, indeed, narrowly escaped
impaling myself upon its sudden and unexpected protrusions), “the
highly-burnished surface of your dexterously arranged window gave to
this engine a rich attractiveness which is altogether lacking at a
closer examination. Nevertheless, this person will not recede from a
perhaps too impulsive offer of one unit of gold, three pieces of silver,
and four and a half brass cash,” my object, of course, being that after
the mutual recrimination of disparagement and over-praise we should in
the length of an hour or two reach a becoming compromise in the middle
distance.

“Well,” responded the menial one, regarding me with an expression in
which he did not even attempt to subdue the baser emotions, “you HAVE
come a long way for nothing”; and he made a pretence of wishing to
replace the object.

“Yet,” I continued, “observe with calm impartiality how insidiously the
rust has assailed the outer polish of the lacquer; perceive here upon
the beneath part of wood the ineffaceable depression of a deeply-pointed
blow; note well the--”

“It was good enough for you to want me to muck up out of the window,
wasn’t it?” demanded the obstinate barbarian, becoming passionate in his
bearing rather than reluctantly, but with courteous grace, lessening the
price to a trifling degree, as we regard the proper way of carrying on
the enterprise.

“It is well said,” I admitted, hoping that he might yet learn wisdom
from my attitude of unruffled urbanity, though I feared that his angle
of negotiating was unconquerably opposed to mine, “but now its many
imperfections are revealed. The inelegance of its outline, the grossness
of the applied colours, the unlucky combination of numbers engraved upon
this plate, the--”

“Damme!” cried the utterly perverse rebel standing opposite, “why don’t
you keep on your Compound, you Yellow Peril? Who asked you to come into
my shop to blackguard the things? Come now, who did?”

“Assuredly it is your place of commerce,” I replied cheerfully,
preparing to bring forward an argument, which in our country never fails
to shake the most stubborn, “yet bend your eyes to the fact that at no
great distance away there stands another and a more alluring stall of
merchandise where--”

“Go to it then!” screamed the abandoned outcast, leaping over his
counter and shouting aloud in a frenzy of uncontrollable rage. “Clear
out, or I’ll bend my feet--” but concluding at this point that some
private calumny from which he was doubtless suffering was disturbing
his mind to so great an extent that there was little likelihood of
our bringing the transaction to a profitable end, I left the shop
immediately but with befitting dignity.

With a fell-founded assurance that you will now be acquiring a really
precise and bird’s-eye-like insight into practically all phases of this
country.

KONG HO.




LETTER VIII


 Concerning the wisdom of the sublime Wei Chung and its
 application to the ordinary problems of existence. The
 meeting of three, hitherto unknown to each other, about a
 wayside inn, and their various manners of conducting the
 enterprise.


VENERATED SIRE,--You will doubtless remember the behaviour of the aged
philosopher Wei Chung, when commanded by the broad-minded emperor of his
time to reveal the hidden sources of his illimitable knowledge, so
that all might freely acquire, and the race thereby become raised to a
position of unparalleled excellence. Taking the well-disposed sovereign
familiarly by the arm, Wei Chung led him to the mouth of his cave in the
forest, and, standing by his side, bade him reflect with open eyes for
a short space of time, and then express aloud what he had seen. “Nothing
of grave import,” declared the emperor when the period was accomplished;
“only the trees shaken by the breeze.” “It is enough,” replied Wei
Chung. “What, to the adroitly-balanced mind, does such a sight
reveal?” “That it is certainly a windy day,” exclaimed the omnipotent
triumphantly, for although admittedly divine, he yet lacked the
philosopher’s discrimination. “On the contrary,” replied the sage
coldly, “that is the natural pronouncement of the rankly superficial. To
the highly-trained intellect it conveys the more subtle truth that the
wind affects the trees, and not the trees affect the wind. For upwards
of seventy years this one has daily stood at the door of his cave for
a brief period, and regularly garnering a single detail of like
brilliance, has made it the well-spring for a day’s reflection. As the
result he now has by heart upwards of twenty-five thousand useful facts,
all serviceable for original proverbs, and an encyclopaedic mind
which would enable him to take a high place in a popular competition
unassisted by a single work of reference.” Much impressed by the
adventure the charitably-inclined emperor presented Wei Chung with an
onyx crown (which the philosopher at once threw into an adjacent well),
and returning to his capital published a decree that each day at
sunrise every person should stand at the door of his dwelling, and after
observing for a period, compare among themselves the details of their
thoughts. By this means he hoped to achieve his imperial purpose, but
although the literal part of the enactment is scrupulously maintained,
especially by the slothful and defamatory, who may be seen standing
at their doors and conversing together even to this day, from some
unforeseen imperfection the intellectual capacity of the race has
remained exactly as it was before.

Nevertheless it is not to be questioned that the system of the versatile
Wei Chung was, in itself, grounded upon a far-seeing accuracy, and
as the need of such a rational observation is deepened among the
inconsistencies and fantastic customs of a barbarian race, I have made
it a useful habit to accept as a guide for the day’s behaviour the
reflections engendered by the first noteworthy incident of the morning.

Upon the day with which this letter concerns itself I had set forth, in
accordance with an ever-present desire, to explore some of the hidden
places of the city. At the time a tempest of great ferocity was raging,
and bending my head before it I had the distinction of coming into
contact with a person of ill-endowed exterior at an angle where two
reads met. This amiable wayfarer exchanged civilities with me after the
politeness characteristic of the labouring classes towards those who
differ from them in speech, dress, or colour: that is to say, he filled
his pipe from my proffered store, and after lighting it threw the match
into my face, and passed on with an appropriate remark.

Doubtless this insignificant occurrence would have faded without
internal comment if the penetrating Wei Chung had never existed, but
now, guided by his sublime precedent, I arranged the incident for the
day’s conduct under three reflective heads.

It was while I was meditating on the second of these that an exclamation
caused me to turn, when I observed a prosperously-outlined person in
the act of picking up a scrip which had the appearance of being lavishly
distended with pieces of gold.

“If I had not seen you pass it, I should have opined that this hyer
wallet belonged to you,” remarked the justice-loving stranger (for
the incident had irresistibly retarded my own footsteps), speaking
the language of this land, but with an accent of penetrating harmony
hitherto unknown to my ears. With these auspicious words he turned over
the object upon his hand doubtfully.

“So entrancing a possibility is, as you gracefully suggest, of
unavoidable denial,” I replied. “Nevertheless, this person will not
hesitate to join his acclamation with yours; for, as the Book of Verses
wisely says, ‘Even the blind, if truly polite, will extol the prospect
from your house-top.’”

“That’s so,” admitted the one by my side. “But I don’t know that there
is any call for a special thanksgiving. As I happen to have more
money of my own than I can reasonably spend I shall drop this in at a
convenient police station. I dare say some poor critter is pining away
for it now.”

Pleasantly impressed by the resolute benevolence of the one who had
a greater store of wealth than he could, by his own unaided efforts,
dispose of, I arranged myself unobtrusively at his side, and maintaining
an exhibition of my most polished and genial conversation, I sought to
penetrate deeply into his esteem.

“Gaze in this direction, Kong,” he said at length, calling me by name
with auspicious familiarity; “I am a benighted stranger in this hyer
city, and so are you, I rek’n. Suppose we liquor up, and then take a few
of the side shows together.”

“The suggestion is one against which I will erect no ill-disposed
barrier,” I at once replied, so inflexibly determined not to lose sight
of a person possessing such engaging attributes as to be cheerfully
prepared even to consume my rice spirit in the inverted position which
his words implied if the display was persisted in. “Nevertheless,”
 I added, with a resourceful prudence, “although by no means
undistinguished among the highest literary and competitive circles of
his native Yuen-ping, the one before you is incapable of walking in the
footsteps of a person whose accumulations are greater than he himself
can appreciably diminish.”

“That’s all right, Kong,” exclaimed the one whom my last words fittingly
described, striking the recess of his lower garment with a gesture of
graceful significance. “When I take a fancy to any one it isn’t a matter
of dollars. I usually carry a trifle of five hundred or a thousand
pounds in my pocket-book, and if we can get through that--why, there’s
plenty more waiting at the bank. Say, though, I hope you don’t keep much
about you; it isn’t really safe.”

“The temptation to do so is one which this person has hitherto
successfully evaded,” I replied. “The contents of this reptile-skin
case”--and not to be outshone in mutual confidence I here displayed it
openly--“do not exceed nine or ten pieces of gold and a like number of
printed obligations promising to pay five pieces each.”

“Put it away, Kong,” he said resolutely. “You won’t need that so long as
you’re with me. Well, now, what sort of a saloon have we here?”

As far as the opinion might be superficially expressed it had every
indication of being one of noteworthy antiquity, and to the innately
modest mind its unassuming diffidence might have lent an added charm.
Nevertheless, on most occasions this person would have maintained
an unshaken dexterity in avoiding its open door, but as the choice
admittedly lay in the hands of one who carried five hundred or a
thousand pieces of gold we went in together and passed through to a
compartment of retiring seclusion.

In our own land, O my orthodox-minded father, where the unfailing
resources of innumerable bands of dragons, spirits, vampires, ghouls,
shadows, omens, and thunderstorms are daily enlisted to carry into
effect the pronouncements of an appointed destiny, we have many
historical examples of the inexorably converging legs of coincidence,
but none, I think, more impressively arranged than the one now
descending this person’s brush.

We had scarcely reposed ourselves, and taken from the hands of an
awaiting slave the vessels of thrice-potent liquid which in this Island
is regarded as the indispensable accompaniment to every movement of
existence, when a third person entered the room, and seating himself
at a table some slightly removed distance away, lowered his head and
abandoned himself to a display of most lavish dejection.

“That poor cuss doesn’t appear to be holiday-making,” remarked the
sincerely-compassionate person at my side, after closely observing the
other for a period; and then, moved by the overpowering munificence of
his inward nature, he called aloud, “Say, stranger, you seem to have
got it thickly in the neck. Is it family affliction or the whisky of the
establishment?”

At these affably-intentioned words the stranger raised his eyes quickly,
with an indication of not having up to that time been aware of our
presence.

“Sir,” he exclaimed, approaching to a spot where he could converse
with a more enhanced facility, “when I loosened the restraint of an
overpowering if unmanly grief, I imagined that I was alone, for I
would have shunned even the most flattering sympathy, but your
charitably-modulated voice invites confidence. The one before you is the
most contemptible, left-handed, and disqualified outcast in creation,
and he is now making his way towards the river, while his widow will be
left to take in washing, his infant son to vend evening printed leaves,
and his graceful and hitherto highly secluded daughters to go upon the
stage.”

“Say, stranger,” interposed this person, by no means unwilling to
engrave upon his memory this newly-acquired form of greeting, “the
emotion is doubtless all-pressing, but in my ornate and flower-laden
tongue we have a salutation, ‘Slowly, slowly; walk slowly,’ which seems
to be of far-seeing application.”

“That’s so,” remarked the one by my side. “Separate it with the teeth,
inch by inch.”

“I will be calm, then,” continued the other (who, to avoid the
complication of the intermingling circumstances, may be described as
the more stranger of the two), and he took of his neckcloth. “I am a
merchant in tea, yellow fat, and mixed spices, in a small but hitherto
satisfactory way.” Thus revealing himself, he continued to set forth
how at an earlier hour he had started on a journey to deposit his wealth
(doubtless as a propitiation of outraged deities) upon a certain bank,
and how, upon reaching the specified point, he discovered that what
he carried had eluded his vigilance. “All gone: notes, gold, and
pocket-book--the savings of a lifetime,” concluded the ill-omened one,
and at the recollection a sudden and even more highly-sustained frenzy
of self-unpopularity involving him, without a pause he addressed himself
by seven and twenty insulting expressions, many of which were quite new
to my understanding.

At the earliest mention of the details affecting the loss, the elbow of
the person who had made himself responsible for the financial obligation
of the day propelled itself against my middle part, and unseen by the
other he indicated to me by means of his features that the entertainment
was becoming one of agreeable prepossession.

“Now, touching this hyer wallet,” he said presently. “How might you
describe it?”

“In colour it was red, and within were two compartments, the one
containing three score notes each of ten pounds, the other fifty pounds
of gold. But what’s the use of describing it? Some lucky demon will pick
it up and pocket the lot, and I shall never see a cent of it again.”

“Then you’d better consult one who reburnishes the eyes,” declared the
magnanimous one with a laugh, and drawing forth the article referred to
he cast it towards the merchant in a small way.

At this point of the narrative my thoroughly incompetent brush confesses
the proportions of the requirement to be beyond its most extended
limit, and many very honourable details are necessarily left without
expression.

“I’ve known men of all sorts, good, bad, and bothwise,” exclaimed the
one who had recovered his possessions; “but I never thought to meet
a gent as would hand over six hundred and fifty pounds as if it was a
toothpick. Sir, it overbalances me; it does, indeed.”

“Say no more about it,” urged the first person, and to suggest
gracefully that the incident had reached its furthest extremity, he
began to set out the melody of an unspoken verse.

“I will say no more, then,” he replied; “but you cannot reasonably
prevent my doing something to express my gratitude. If you are not too
proud you will come and partake of food and wine with me beneath the
sign of the Funereal Male Cow, and to show my confidence in you I shall
insist upon you carrying my pocket-book.”

The person whom I had first encountered suffered his face to become
excessively amused. “Say, stranger, do you take me for a pack-mule?”
 he replied good-naturedly. “I already have about as much as I want to
handle. Never mind; we’ll come along with you, and Mr. Kong shall carry
your bullion.”

At this delicate and high-minded proposal a rapid change, in no way
complimentary to my explicit habit of adequately conducting any venture
upon which I may be engaged, came over the face of the second person.

“Sir,” he exclaimed, “I have nothing to say against this gentleman, but
I am under no obligation to him, and I don’t see why I should trust him
with everything I possess.”

“Stranger,” exclaimed the other rising to his feet (and from this point
it must be understood that the various details succeeded one another
with a really agile dexterity), “let me tell you that Mr. Kong is my
friend, and that ought to be enough.”

“It is. If you say this gentleman is your friend, and that you have
known him long and intimately enough to be able to answer for him,
that’s good enough for me.”

“Well,” admitted the first person, and I could not conceal from myself
that his tone was inauspiciously reluctant, “I can’t exactly say that
I’ve known him long; in fact I only met him half an hour ago. But I have
the fullest confidence in his integrity.”

“It’s just as I expected. Well, sir, you’re good-natured enough for
anything, but if you’ll excuse me, I must say that you’re a small piece
of an earthenware vessel after all”--the veiled allusion doubtlessly
being that the vessel of necessity being broken, the contents inevitably
escape--“and I hope you’re not being had.”

“I’m not, and I’ll prove it before we go out together,” retorted the
engaging one, who had in the meantime become so actively impetuous on my
account, that he did not remain content with the spoken words, but threw
the various belongings about as he mentioned them in a really profuse
display of inimitable vehemence. “Here, Kong, take this hyer pocket-book
whatever he says. Now on the top of that take everything I’ve got, and
you know what THAT figures up to. Now give this gentleman your little
lot to keep him quiet; I don’t ask for anything. Now, stranger, I’m
ready. You and I will take a stroll round the block and back again, and
if Mr. Kong isn’t waiting here for us when we return with everything
intact and O.K., I’ll double your deposit and never trust a durned soul
again.”

Nodding genially over his shoulder with a harmonious understanding,
expressive of the fact that we were embarking upon an undeniably
diverting episode, the benevolent-souled person who had accumulated more
riches than he was competent to melt away himself, passed out, urging
the doubtful and still protesting one before him.

Thus abandoned to my own reflections, I pondered for a short time
profitably on the third head of the day’s meditation (Touching the match
and this person’s unattractively-lined face. The revealed truth: the
inexperienced sheep cannot pass through the hedge without leaving
portions of his wool), and then finding the philosophy of Wei Chung very
good, I determined to remove the superfluous apprehensions of the vender
of food-stuffs with less delay by setting out and meeting them on their
return.

A few paces distant from the door, one of the ever-present watchers of
the street was standing, watching the street with unremitting vigilance,
while from the well-guarded expression of his face it might nevertheless
be gathered that he stood as though in expectation.

“Prosperity,” I said, with seasonable greeting. (For no excess of
consideration is too great to be lavished upon these, who unite
within themselves the courage of a high warrior, the expertness of a
three-handed magician, and the courtesy of a genial mandarin.) “I
seek two, apparelled thus and thus. Did you, by any chance, mark the
direction of their footsteps?”

“Oh,” he said, regarding this person with a most flattering application,
“YOU seek them, do you? Well, they’ve just gone off in a hansom, and
they’ll want a lot of seeking for the next week or two. You let them
carry your purse, perhaps?”

“Assuredly,” I replied. “As a mark of confidence; this person, for his
part, receiving a like token at their hands.”

“That’s it,” said the official watcher, conveying into his voice a
subtle indication that he had become excessively fatigued. “It’s like
a nursery tale--never too old to take with the kids. Well, come along,
poor lamb, the station isn’t far.”

So great had become the reliance which by this time I habitually reposed
in these men, that I never sought to oppose their pronouncements (such
a course being not only useless but undignified), and we therefore
together reached the place which the one by my side had described as a
station.

From the outside the building was in no way imposing, but upon reaching
an inner dungeon it at once became plain that no matter with what crime
a person might be charged, even the most stubborn resistance would be
unavailing. Before a fiercely-burning fire were arranged metal pincers,
massive skewers, ornamental branding irons, and the usual accessories of
the grill, one tool being already thrust into the heart of the flame
to indicate the nature of its use, and its immediate readiness for the
purpose. Pegs from which the accused could be hung by the thumbs
with weights attached to the feet, covered an entire wall; chains,
shackling-irons, fetters, steel rings for compressing the throat, and
belts for tightening the chest, all had their appointed places, while
the Chair, the Boot, the Heavy Hat, and many other appliances quite
unknown to our system of administering justice were scattered about.

Without pausing to select any of these, the one who led me approached
a raised desk at which was seated a less warlike official, whose
sympathetic appearance inspired confidence. “Kong Ho,” exclaimed to
himself the person who is inscribing these words, “here is an individual
into whose discriminating ear it would be well to pour the exact
happening without evasion. Then even if the accusation against you be
that of resembling another or trafficking with unlawful Forces, he will
doubtless arrange the matter so that the expiation shall be as light and
inexpensive as possible.”

By this time certain other officials had drawn near. “What is it?” I
heard one demand, and another replied, “Brooklyn Ben and Jimmie the
Butterman again. Ah, they aren’t artful, are they!” but at this moment
the two into whose power I had chiefly fallen having conversed together,
I was commanded to advance towards them and reveal my name.

“Kong,” I replied freely; and I had formed a design to explain somewhat
of the many illustrious ancestors of the House, when the one at the
desk, pausing to inscribe my answer in a book, spoke out.

“Kong?” he said. “Is that the christian or surname?”

“Sir-name?” replied this person between two thoughts. “Undoubtedly
the one before you is entitled by public examination to the degree
‘Recognised Talent,’ which may, as a meritorious distinction, be held
equal to your title of a warrior clad in armour. Yet, if it is so held,
that would rightly be this person’s official name of Paik.”

“Oh, it would, would it?” said the one seated upon the high chair.
“That’s quite clear. Are there any other names as well?”

“Assuredly,” I explained, pained inwardly that one of official rank
should so slightly esteem my appearance as to judge that I was so
meagrely endowed. “The milk name of Ho; Tsin upon entering the Classes;
as a Great Name Cheng; another style in Quank; the official title
already expressed, and T’chun, Li, Yuen and Nung as the various
emergencies of life arise.”

“Thank you,” said the high-chair official courteously. “Now, just the
name in full, please, without any velvet trimmings.”

“Kong,” began this person, desirous above all things of putting
the matter competently, yet secretly perturbed as to what might be
considered superfluous and what deemed a perfidious suppression, “Ho
Tsin Cheng Quank--”

“Hold hard,” cried this same one, restraining me with an uplifted pen.
“Did you say ‘Quack’?”

“Quack?” repeated this person, beginning to become involved within
himself, and not grasping the detail in the right position. “In a manner
of setting the expression forth--”

“Put him down, ‘Quack Duck,’ sir,” exclaimed one of dog-like dejection
who stood by. “Most of these Lascars haven’t got any real names--they
just go by what any one happens to call them at the time, like ‘Burmese
Ike’ down at the Mint,” and this person unfortunately chancing to smile
and bow acquiescently at that moment (not with any set intention, but
as a general principle of courteous urbanity), in place of his really
distinguished titles he will henceforth appear among the historical
records of this dynasty under what he cannot disguise from his inner
misgivings to be the low-caste appellation of Quack Duck.

“Now the address, please,” continued the high one, again preparing to
inscribe the word, and being determined that by no mischance should this
particular be offensively reported, I unhesitatingly replied, “Beneath
the Sign of the Lead Tortoise, on the northern course from the Lotus
Pools outside the walls of Yuen-ping.”

This answer the one with the book did not immediately record. “I
don’t say it isn’t all right when you know the parts,” he remarked
broad-mindedly, “but it does sound a trifle irregular. Can’t you give it
a number and a street?”

“I fancy it must be a pub, sir,” observed another. “He said that it had
a sign--the Red Tortoise.”

“Well, haven’t you got a London address?” said the high one, and this
person being able to supply a street and a number as desired, this part
of the undertaking was disposed of, to his cordial satisfaction.

“Now let me see the articles which these men left with you,” commanded
the chieftain of the band, and without any misleading discrepancies I at
once drew forth from an inner sleeve the two scrips, of which adequate
mention has already been made, another hitherto undescribed, two
instruments for measuring the passing hours of the day, together with a
chain of fine gold ingeniously wrought into the semblance of a cable,
an ornament for the breast, set about with a jewel, two neck-cloths of
a kind usually carried in the pocket, a book for recording happenings of
any moment, pieces of money to the value of about eleven taels, a silver
flagon, a sheathed weapon and a few lesser objects of insignificant
value. These various details I laid obsequiously before the one who had
commanded it, while the others stood around either in explicit silence
or speaking softly beneath their breath.

“Do I understand that the two persons left all these things with you,
while they took your purse in exchange?” said the high official, after
examining certain obscure signs upon the metals, the contents of the
third scrip, and the like.

“It cannot reasonably be denied,” I replied; “inasmuch as they departed
without them.”

“Spontaneously?” he demanded, and in spite of the unevadible severity of
his voice the expression of his nearer eye deviated somewhat.

“The spoken and conclusive word of the first was that it was his
intention to commit to this one’s keeping everything which he had; the
assertion of the second being that with this scrip I received all that
he possessed.”

“While of yours, what did they get, Mr. Quack?” and the tone of the one
who spoke had a much more gratifying modulation than before, while the
attitudes of those who stood around had favourably changed, until they
now conveyed a message of deliberate esteem.

“A serpent-skin case of two enclosures,” I replied. “On the one side
was a handcount of the small copper-pieces of this Island, which I had
caused to be burnished and gilt for the purpose of taking back to amuse
those of Yuen-ping. On the other side were two or three pages from a
gravity-removing printed leaf entitled ‘Bits of Tits,’ with which
this person weekly instructs himself in the simpler rudiments of the
language. For the rest the case was controlled by a hidden spring, and
inscribed about with a charm against loss, consumption by fire, or being
secretly acquired by the unworthy.”

“I don’t think you stand in much need of that charm, Mr. Quack,”
 remarked another of more than ordinary rank, who was also present. “Then
they really got practically no money from you?”

“By no means,” I admitted. “It was never literally stipulated, and
whatever of wealth he possesses this person carries in a concealed spot
beneath his waistbelt.” (For even to these, virtuous sire, I did not
deem it expedient to reveal the fact that in reality it is hidden within
the sole of my left sandal.)

“I congratulate you,” he said with lavish refinement. “Ben and the
Butterman can be very bland and persuasive. Could you tell me, as a
matter of professional curiosity, what first put you on your guard?”

“In this person’s country,” I replied, “there is an apt saying, ‘The
sagacious bird does not build his nest twice in the empty soup-toureen,’
and by observing closely what has gone before one may accurately
conjecture much that will follow after.” It may be, that out of my
insufferable shortcomings of style and expression, this answer did not
convey to his mind the logical sequence of the warning; yet it would
have been more difficult to show him how everything arose from the
faultlessly-balanced system of the heroic Wei Chung, or the exact
parallel lying between the ill-clad outcast who demanded a portion of
tobacco and the cheerfully unassuming stranger who had in his possession
a larger accumulation of money than he could conveniently disperse.

In such a manner I took leave of the station and those connected with
it, after directing that the share of the spoil which fell by the law
of this Island to my lot should be sold and the money of exchange
faithfully divided among the virtuous and necessitous of both sexes. The
higher officials each waved me pleasantly by the hand, according to the
striking and picturesque custom of the land, while the lesser ones stood
around and spoke flattering words as I departed, as “honourable,” “a
small piece of all-right,” “astute ancient male fowl,” “ah!” and the
like.

With repeated assurances that however ineptly the adventure may at the
time appear to be tending, as regards the essentials of true dignity
and an undeviating grasp upon articles of negotiable value, nothing of a
regrettable incident need be feared.

KONG HO.




LETTER IX


 Concerning the proverb of the highly-accomplished horse. The
 various perils to be encountered in the Beneath Parts. The
 inexplicable journey performed by this one, and concerning
 the obscurity of the witchcraft employed.


VENERATED SIRE,--Among these islanders there is a proverb, “Do not place
the carte” (or card, the two words having an identical purport, and
both signifying the inscribed tablet of viands prepared for a banquet,)
“before the horse.” Doubtless the saying first arose as a timely rebuke
to a certain barbarian emperor who announced his contempt for the
intelligence of his subjects by conferring high mandarin rank upon a
favourite steed and ceremoniously appointing it to be his chancellor;
but from the narrower moral that an unreasoning animal is out of place,
and even unseemly, in the entertaining hall or council chamber, the
expression has in the course of time taken a wider application and is
now freely used as an insidious thrust at one who may be suspected of
contrariness of character, of confusing issues, or of acting in a vain
or illogical manner. I had already preserved the saying among other
instances of foreign thought and expression which I am collecting for
your dignified amusement, as it is very characteristic of the wisdom and
humour of these Outer Lands. The imagination is essentially barbaric. A
horse--doubtless well-groomed, richly-caparisoned, and as intellectual
as the circumstances will permit, but inevitably an animal of degraded
attributes and untraceable ancestry--a horse reclining before a lavishly
set-out table and considering well of what dish it shall next partake!
Could anything, it appears, be more diverting! Truly to our more refined
outlook the analogy is lacking both in delicacy of wit and in exactitude
of balance, but to the grosser barbarian conception of what is
gravity-removing it is irresistible.

I am, however, reminded of the saying by perceiving that I was on the
point of recording certain details of recent occurrence without first
unrolling to your mind the incidents from which it has arisen that the
person who is now communicating with you is no longer reposing in the
Capital, but spending a period profitably in observing the habits of
those who dwell in the more secluded recesses on the outskirts of the
Island. This reversal of the proper sequence of affairs would doubtless
strike those around as an instance of setting the banquet before the
horse. Without delay, then, to pursue the allusion to its appropriate
end, I will return, as it may be said, to my nosebag.

At various points about the streets of the Capital there are certain
caverns artificially let into the bowels of the earth, to which any
person may betake himself upon purchasing a printed sign which he must
display to the guardian of the gate. Once within the underneathmost
parts he is free to be carried from place to place by means of the
trains of carriages which I have already described to you, until he
would return to the outer surface, when he must again display his
talisman before he is permitted to pass forth. Nor is this an empty
form, for upon an occasion this person himself witnessed a very bitter
contention between a keeper of the barrier and one whose token had
through some cause lost its potency.

In the company of the experienced I had previously gone through the
trial without mischance, so that recently when I expressed a wish to
visit a certain Palace, and was informed that the most convenient manner
would be to descend into the nearest cavern, I had no reasonable device
for avoiding the encounter. Nevertheless, enlightened sire, I will
not attempt to conceal from your omniscience that I was by no means
impetuous towards the adventure. Owing to the pugnacious and unworthy
suspicions of those who direct their destinies, I have not yet been
able to penetrate the exact connection between the movements of these
hot-smoke chariots and the Unseen Forces. To a person whose chief object
in life is to avoid giving offence to any of the innumerable demons
which are ever on the watch to revenge themselves upon our slightest
indiscretion, this uncertainty opens an unending vista of intolerable
possibilities. As if to emphasise the perils of this overhanging doubt
the surroundings are ingeniously arranged so as to represent as nearly
as practicable the terrors of the Beneath World. Both by day and night a
funereal gloom envelops the caverns, the pathways and resting-places are
meagre and so constructed as to be devoid of attraction or repose, and
by a skilful contrivance the natural atmosphere is secretly withdrawn
and a very acrimonious sulphurous haze driven in to replace it.
In sudden and unforeseen places eyes of fire open and close with
disconcerting rapidity, and even change colour in vindictive
significance; wooden hands are outstretched as in unrelenting rigidity
against supplication, or, divining the unexpressed thoughts, inexorably
point, as one gazes, still deeper into the recesses of the earth; while
the air is never free from the sounds of groans, shrieks, the rattling
of chains, dull, hopeless noises beneath one’s feet or overhead, and the
hoarse wordless cries of despair with which the attending slaves of the
caverns greet the distant clamour of every approaching fire-chariot.
Admittedly the intention of the device is benevolently conceived, and
it is strenuously asserted that many persons of corrupt habits and
ill-balanced lives, upon waking unexpectedly while passing through
these Beneath Parts, have abandoned the remainder of their journey, and,
escaping hastily to the outer air, have from that time onwards led a
pure and consistent existence; but, on the other foot, those who are
compelled to use the caverns daily, freely confess that the surroundings
to not in any material degree purify their lives of tranquillise the
nature of their inner thoughts.

In this emergency I did not neglect to write out a diversity of charms
against every possible variety of evil influence, and concealing them
lavishly about my head and body, I presented myself with the outer
confidence of a person who is inured to the exploit. Doubtless thereby
being mistaken for one of themselves in the obscurity, I received the
inscribed safeguard without opposition, and even an added sum in copper
pieces, which I discreetly returned to the one behind the shutter, with
the request that he would honourably burn a few joss sticks or sacrifice
to a trivial amount, to the success of my journey. In such a manner
I reached an awaiting train, and, taking up within it a position of
retiring modesty, I definitely committed myself to the undertaking.

At the next tarrying place there entered a barbarian of high-class
appearance, and being by this time less assured of my competence in the
matter unaided, both on account of the multiplicity of evil omens on
every side, and the perverse impulses of the guiding demon, whereby
at sudden angles certain of my organs had the emotion of being left
irrevocably behind and others of being snatched relentlessly forward, I
approached him courteously.

“Behold,” I said, “many thousand li of water, both fresh and bitter,
flow between the one who is addressing you and his native town of
Yuen-ping, where the tablets at the street corners are as familiar to
him as the lines of his own unshapely hands; for, as it is truly said,
‘Does the starling know the lotus roots, or the pomfret read its way by
the signs among the upper branches of the pines?’ Out of the necessities
of his ignorance and your own overwhelming condescension enlighten him,
therefore, whether the destination of this fire-chariot by any chance
corresponds with the inscribed name upon his talisman?”

Thus adjured, the stranger benevolently turned himself to the detail,
and upon consulting a book of symbols he expressed himself to this wise:
that after a sufficient interval I should come into a certain station,
called in part after the title of the enlightened ruler of this Island,
and there abandoning the train which was carrying us, I should enter
another which would bring me out of the Beneath Parts and presently into
the midst of that Palace which I sought. This advice seemed good, for
a reasonable connection might be supposed to exist between a station
so auspiciously called and a Palace bearing the harmonious name of
the gracious and universally-revered sovereign-consort. Accordingly I
thanked him ceremoniously, not only on my own part, but also on behalf
of eleven generations of immediate ancestors, and in the name of seven
generations who should come after, and he on his side agreeably replied
that he was sure his grandmother would have done as much for mine, and
he sincerely hoped that none of his great-great-grandchildren would
prove less obliging. In this intellectual manner, varied with the
entertainment of profuse bows, the time passed cordially between us
until the barbarian reached his own alighting stage, when he again
repeated the various details of the strategy for my observance.

At this point let it be set forth deliberately that there existed no
treachery in the advice, still less that this person is incapable of
competently achieving the destined end of any hazard upon which he
may embark when once the guiding signs have been made clear to his
understanding. Whatever entanglement arose was due merely to the
conflicting manners of expression used by two widely-varying races, even
as our own proverb says, “What is only sauce for the cod is serious for
the oyster.”

At the station indicated as bearing the sign of the ruler of the country
(which even a person of little discernment could have recognised by
the highly-illuminated representation bearing the elusively-worded
inscription, “In packets only”), I left this fire-chariot, and at once
perceiving another in an attitude of departure, I entered it, as the
casual barbarian had definitely instructed, and began to assure myself
that I had already become expertly proficient in the art of journeying
among these Beneath Regions and to foresee the time, not far distant,
when others would confidently address themselves to me in their
extremities. So entrancing did this contemplation grow, that this
outrageous person began to compose the actual words with which he would
instruct them as the occasion arose, as thus, “Undoubtedly, O virtuous
and not unattractive maiden, this fire-engine will ultimately lead your
refined footsteps into the street called Those who Bake Food. Do not
hesitate, therefore, to occupy the vacant place by this insignificant
one’s side”; or, “By no means, honourable sir; the Cross of Charing
is in the precisely opposite direction to that selected by this
self-opinionated machine for its inopportune destination. Do not rebuke
this person for his immoderate loss of mental gravity, for your mistake,
though pardonable in a stranger, is really excessively diverting. Your
most prudent course now will assuredly be to cast yourself from the
carriage without delay and rely upon the benevolent intervention of a
fire-chariot proceeding backwards.”

Alas, it is truly said, “None but sword-swallowers should endeavour to
swallow swords,” thereby signifying the vast chasm that lies between
those who are really adroit in an undertaking and those who only think
that they may easily become so. Presently it began to become deeply
impressed upon my discrimination that the journey was taking a more
lengthy duration than I had been given to understand would be the case,
while at the same time a permanent deliverance from the terrors of the
Beneath Parts seemed to be insidiously lengthening out into a funereal
unattainableness. The point of this person’s destination, he had been
assured on all hands, was a spot beyond which even the most aggressively
assertive engine could not proceed, so that he had no fears of being
incapably drawn into more remote places, yet when hour after hour passed
and the ill-destined machine never failed in its malicious endeavours to
leave each successive tarrying station, it is not to be denied that
my imagination dwelt regretfully upon the true civilisation of our
own enlightened country, where, by the considerate intervention of an
all-wise government, the possibilities of so distressing an experience
are sympathetically removed from one’s path. Thus the greater part of
the day had faded, and I was conjecturing that by this time we must
inevitably be approaching the barren and inhospitable country which
forms the northern limit of the Island, when the door suddenly opened
and the barbarian stranger whom I had left many hundred li behind
entered the carriage.

At this manifestation all uncertainty departed, and I now understood
that to some obscure end witchcraft of a very powerful and high-caste
kind was being employed around me; for in no other way was it credible
to one’s intelligence that a person could propel himself through the
air with a speed greater than that of one of these fire-chariots, and
overtake it. Doubtless it was a part of this same scheme which made it
seem expedient to the stranger that he should feign a part, for he
at once greeted me as though the occasion were a matter of everyday
happening, exclaiming genially--

“Well, Mr. Kong, returning? And what do you think of the Palace?”

“It is fitly observed, ‘To the earthworm the rice stalk is as high as
the pagoda,’” I replied with adroit evasion, clearly understanding from
his manner that for some reason, not yet revealed to me, a course of
dissimulation was expedient in order to mislead the surrounding
demons concerning my movements, and by a subtle indication of the face
conveying to the stranger an assurance that I had tactfully grasped
the requirement, and would endeavour to walk well upon his heels,
“and therefore it would be unseemly for a person of my insignificant
attainments to engage in the doubtful flattery of comparing it with
the many other residences of the pure and exalted which embellish your
Capital.”

“Oh,” said the one whom I may now suitably describe by the name of Sir
Philip, “that’s rather a useful proverb sometimes. Many people there?”

At this inquiry I could not disguise from myself an emotion that
the person seated opposite was not diplomatically inspired in so
persistently clinging to the one subject upon which he must assuredly
know that I experienced an all-pervading deficiency. Nevertheless,
being by this more fully convinced that the disguise was one of critical
necessity, and not deeming that the essential ceremonies of one Palace
would differ from those of another, no matter in what land they stood
(while through all I read a clear design on Sir Philip’s part that
the opportunity was craftily arranged so that I might impress upon any
vindictively-intentioned spirits within hearing an assumption of high
protection), I replied that the gathering had been one of unparalleled
splendour, both by reason of the multitude of exalted nobles present
and also owing to the jewelled magnificence lavished on every detail.
Furthermore, I continued, now definitely abandoning all the promptings
of a wise reserve, and reflecting, as we say, that one may as well be
drowned in the ocean as in a wooden bucket, not only did the sublime and
unapproachable sovereign graciously permit me to kow-tow respectfully
before him, but subsequently calling me to his side beneath a canopy of
golden radiance, he conversed genially with me and benevolently assured
me of his sympathetic favour on all occasions (this, I conjectured,
would certainly overawe any Evil Force not among the very highest
circles), while the no less magnanimous Prince of the Imperial Line
questioned me with flattering assiduousness concerning a method of
communicating with persons at a distance by means of blows or stamps
upon a post (as far as the outer meaning conveyed itself to me), the
houses which we build, and whether they contained an adequate provision
of enclosed spaces in the walls.

Doubtless I could have continued in this praiseworthy spirit of delicate
cordiality to an indefinite amount had I not chanced to observe at this
point that the expression of Sir Philip’s urbanity had become entangled
in a variety of other emotions, not all propitious to the scheme,
so that in order to retire imperceptibly within myself I smiled
broad-mindedly, remarking that it was well said that the moon was only
bright while the sun was hid, and that I had lately been dazzled with
the sight of so much brilliance and virtuous condescension that
there were occasions when I questioned inwardly how much I had really
witnessed, and how much had been conveyed to me in the nature of an
introspective vision.

It will already have been made plain to you, O my courtly-mannered
father, that these barbarians are totally deficient in the polite
art whereby two persons may carry on a flattering and highly-attuned
conversation, mutually advantageous to the esteem of each, without it
being necessary in any way that their statements should have more than
an ornamental actuality. So wanting in this, the most concentrated form
of truly well-bred entertainment, are even their high officials,
that after a few more remarks, to which I made answer in a spirit of
skilfully-sustained elusiveness, the utterly obtuse Sir Philip said at
length, “Excuse my asking, Mr. Kong, but have you really been to the
Alexandra Palace at all?”

Admittedly there are few occasions in life on which it is not possible
to fail to see the inopportune or low-class by a dignified impassiveness
of features, an adroitly-directed jest, or a remark of baffling
inconsequence, but in the face of so distressingly straightforward a
demand what can be advanced by a person of susceptible refinement when
opposed to one of incomparably larger dimensions, imprisoned by his side
in the recess of a fire-chariot which is leaping forward with uncurbed
velocity, and surrounded by demons with whose habits and partialities he
is unfamiliar?

“In a manner of expressing the circumstance,” I replied, “it is not to
be denied that this person’s actual footsteps may have imperceptibly
been drawn somewhat aside from the path of his former design. Yet
inasmuch as it is truly said that the body is in all things subservient
to the mind, and is led withersoever it is willed, and as your engaging
directions were scrupulously observed with undeviating fidelity, it
would be impertinently self-opinionated on this person’s part to
imply that they failed to guide him to his destination. Thus, for all
ceremonial purposes, it is permissible conscientiously to assume that he
HAS been there.”

“I am afraid that I must not have been sufficiently clear,” said Sir
Philip. “Did you miss the train at King’s Cross?”

“By no means,” I replied firmly, pained inwardly that he should cast the
shadow of such narrow incompetence upon me. “Seeing this machine on the
point of setting forth on a journey, even as your overwhelming
sagacity had enabled you to predict would be the case, I embarked with
self-reliant confidence.”

“Good lord!” murmured the person opposite, beginning to manifest an
excess of emotion for which I was quite unable to account. “Then you
have been in this train--your actual footsteps I mean, Mr. Kong; not
your ceremonial abstract subliminal ego--ever since?”

To this I replied that his words shone like the moon at midnight with
scintillating points of truth; adding, however, as the courtesies of
the occasion required, that I had been so impressed with the many-sided
brilliance of his conversation earlier in the day as to render the
flight of time practically unnoticed by me.

“But did it never occur to you to ask at one of the stations?” he
demanded, still continuing to wave his hands incapably from side to
side. “Any of the porters would have told you.”

“Kong Li Heng, the founder of our line, who was really great, has been
dead eleven centuries, and no single fact or incident connected with his
life has been preserved to influence mankind,” I replied. “How much less
will it matter, then, even in so limited a space of time as a hundred
years, in what fashion so insignificant a person as the one before you
acted on any occasion, and why, therefore, should he distress himself
unnecessarily to any precise end?” In this manner I sought to place
before him the dignified example of an imperturbability which can be
maintained in every emergency, and at the same time to administer a
plain yet scrupulously-sheathed rebuke; for the inauspicious manner in
which he had first drawn me on to speak confidently of the ceremonies of
the Royal Palace and then held up my inadequacy to undeserved contempt
had not rejoiced my imagination, and I was still uncertain how much to
claim, and whether, perchance, even yet a more subtle craft lay under
all.

“Well, in any case, when you go back you can claim the distinction of
having been taken seven times round London, although you can’t really
have seen much of it,” said Sir Philip. “This is a Circle train.”

At this assertion I looked up. Though admittedly curved a little about
the roof the chariot was in every essential degree what we should
pronounce to be a square one; whereupon, feeling at length that the
involvement had definitely passed to a point beyond my contemptible
discernment, I spread out my hands acquiescently and affably remarked
that the days were lengthening out pleasantly.

In such a manner I became acquainted with the one Sir Philip, and
thereby, in a somewhat circuitous line, the original purpose which
possessed my brush when I began this inept and commonplace letter
is reached; for the person in question not only lay upon himself the
obligation of leading me “by the strings of his apron-garment”--in the
characteristic and fanciful turn of the barbarian language--to that same
Palace on the following day, but thenceforth gracefully affecting to
discern certain agreeable virtues in my conversation and custom of habit
he frequently sought me out. More recently, on the double plea that they
of his household had a desire to meet me, and that if I spent all my
time within the Capital my impressions of the Island would necessarily
be ill-balanced and deformed, he advanced a project that I should
accompany him to a spot where, as far as I was competent to grasp
the idiom, he was in the habit of sitting (doubtless in an abstruse
reverie), in the country; and having assured myself by means of discreet
innuendo that the seat referred to would be adequate for this person
also, and that the occasion did not in any way involve a payment of
money, I at once expressed my willingness towards the adventure.

With numerous expressions of unfeigned regret (from a filial point of
view) that the voice of one of the maidens of the household, lifted
in the nature of a defiance against this one to engage with her in a
two-handed conflict of hong pong, obliges him to bring this immature
composition to a hasty close.

KONG HO.




LETTER X


 Concerning the authority of this high official, Sir Philip.
 The side-slipperyness of barbarian etiquette. The hurl-
 headlong sportiveness and that achieving its end by means of
 curved mallets.


VENERATED SIRE,--If this person’s memory is accurately poised on the
detail, he was compelled to abandon his former letter (when on the point
of describing the customs of these outer places), in order to take part
in a philosophical discussion with some of the venerable sages of the
neighbourhood.

Resuming the narration where it had reached this remote province of
the Empire, it is a suitable opportunity to explain that this same
Sir Philip is here greeted on every side with marks of deferential
submission, and is undoubtedly an official of high button, for whenever
the inclination seizes him he causes prisoners to be sought out, and
then proceeds to administer justice impartially upon them. In the case
of the wealthy and those who have face to lose, the matter is generally
arranged, to his profit and to the satisfaction of all, by the payment
of an adequate sum of money, after the invariable custom of our own
mandarincy. When this incentive to leniency is absent it is usual to
condemn the captive to imprisonment in a cell (it is denied officially,
but there is no reason to doubt that a large earthenware vessel is
occasionally used for this purpose,) for varying periods, though it is
notorious that in the case of the very necessitous they are sometimes
set freely at liberty, and those who took them publicly reprimanded for
accusing persons from whose condition on possible profit could arise.
This confinement is seldom inflicted for a longer period than seven,
fourteen, or twenty-one days (these being lucky numbers,) except in the
case of those who have been held guilty of ensnaring certain birds and
beasts which appear to be regarded as sacred, for they have their duly
appointed attendants who wear a garb and are trained in the dexterous
use of arms, lurking with loaded weapons in secret places to catch the
unwary, both by night and day. Upheld by the high nature of their office
these persons shrink from no encounter and even suffer themselves to be
killed with resolute unconcern; but when successful they are not denied
an efficient triumph, for it is admitted that those whom they capture
are marked men from that time (doubtless being branded upon the body
with the name of their captor), and no future defence is availing. The
third punishment, that of torture, is reserved for a class of solitary
mendicants who travel from place to place, doubtless spreading the germs
of an inflammatory doctrine of rebellion, for, owing to my own degraded
obtuseness, the actual nature of their crimes could never be made clear
to me. Of the tortures employed that known in their language as the
“bath” (for which we have no real equivalent,) is the most dreaded, and
this person has himself beheld men of gigantic proportions, whose bodies
bore the stain of a voluntary endurance to every privation, abandon
themselves to a most ignoble despair upon hearing the ill-destined word.
Unquestionably the infliction is closely connected with our own ordeal
of boiling water, but from other indications it is only reasonable to
admit that there is an added ingredient, of which we probably have no
knowledge, whereby the effect is enhanced in every degree, and the outer
surface of the victim rendered more vulnerable. There is also another
and milder form of torture, known as the “task”, consisting either of
sharp-edged stones being broken upon the body, or else the body broken
upon sharp-edged stones, but precisely which is the official etiquette
of the case this person’s insatiable passion for accuracy and his
short-sighted limitations among the more technical outlines of the
language, prevent him from stating definitely.

Let it here be openly confessed that the intricately-arranged titles
used among these islanders, and the widely-varying dignities which they
convey, have never ceased to embarrass my greetings on all occasions,
and even yet, when a more crystal insight into their strangely illogical
manners enables me not only to understand them clearly myself, but
also to expound their significance to others, a necessary reticence is
blended with my most profuse cordiality, and my salutations to one whom
I am for the first time encountering are now so irreproachably balanced,
that I can imperceptibly develop them into an engaging effusion, or,
without actual offence, draw back into a condition of unapproachable
exclusiveness as the necessity may arise. With us, O my immaculate sire,
a yellow silk umbrella has for three thousand years denoted a fixed and
recognisable title. A mandarin of the sixth degree need not hesitate to
mingle on terms of assured equality with other mandarins of the sixth
degree, and without any guide beyond a seemly instinct he perceives
the reasonableness of assuming a deferential obsequiousness before a
mandarin of the fifth rank, and a counterbalancing arrogance when in the
society of an official who has only risen to the seventh degree, thus
conforming to that essential principle of harmonious intercourse,
“Remember that Chang Chow’s ceiling is Tong Wi’s floor”; but who shall
walk with even footsteps in a land where the most degraded may legally
bear the same distinguished name as that of the enlightened sovereign
himself, where the admittedly difficult but even more purposeless
achievement of causing a gold mine to float is held to be more
praiseworthy than to pass a competitive examination or to compose a
poem of inimitable brilliance, and where one wearing gilt buttons and an
emblem in his hat proves upon ingratiating approach not to be a powerful
official but a covetous and illiterate slave of inferior rank?
Thus, through their own narrow-minded inconsistencies, even the most
ceremoniously-proficient may at times present an ill-balanced attitude.
This, without reproach to himself, concerns the inward cause whereby
the one who is placed to you in the relation of an affectionate and
ever-resourceful son found unexpectedly that he had lost the benignant
full face of a lady of exalted title.

At that time I had formed the acquaintance, in an obscure quarter of the
city, of one who wore a uniform, and was addressed on all sides as the
commander of a band, while the gold letters upon the neck part of his
outer garment inevitably suggested that he had borne an honourable share
in the recent campaign in a distant land. As I had frequently met many
of similar rank drinking tea at the house of the engaging countess to
whom I have alluded, I did not hesitate to prevail upon this Captain
Miggs to accompany me there upon an occasion also, assuring him of
equality and a sympathetic reception; but from the moment of our
arrival the attitudes of those around pointed to the existence of some
unpropitious barrier invisible to me, and when the one with whom I was
associated took up an unassailable position upon the central table,
and began to speak authoritatively upon the subject of The Virtues,
the unenviable condition of the proud and affluent, and the myriads of
fire-demons certainly laying in wait for those who partook of spiced tea
and rich foods in the afternoon, and did not wear a uniform similar to
his own, I began to recognise that the selection had been inauspiciously
arranged. Upon taxing some around with the discrepancy (as there seemed
to be no more dignified way of evading the responsibility), they were
unable to contend against me that there were, indeed, two, if not more,
distinct varieties of those bearing the rank of captain, and that they
themselves belonged to an entirely different camp, wearing another
dress, and possessing no authority to display the symbol of the letters
S.A. upon their necks. With this admission I was content to leave the
matter, in no way accusing them of actual duplicity, yet so withdrawing
that any of unprejudiced standing could not fail to carry away the
impression that I had been the victim of an unworthy artifice, and had
been lured into their society by the pretext that they were other than
what they really were.

With the bitter-flavoured memory of this, and other in no way dissimilar
episodes, lingering in my throat, it need not be a matter of conjecture
that for a time I greeted warily all who bore a title, a mark of rank,
or any similar appendage; who wore a uniform, weapon, brass helmet,
jewelled crown, coat of distinctive colour, or any excessive superfluity
of pearl or metal buttons; who went forth surrounded by a retinue, sat
publicly in a chair or allegorical chariot, spoke loudly in the highways
and places in a tone of official pronouncement, displayed any feather,
emblem, inscribed badge, or printed announcement upon a pole, or in any
way conducted themselves in what we should esteem to be fitting to
a position of high dignity. From this arose the absence of outward
enthusiasm with which I at first received Sir Philip’s extended
favour; for although I had come to distrust all the reasonable signs of
established power, I distrusted, to a much more enhanced degree, their
complete absence; and when I observed that the one in question was never
accompanied by a band of musicians or flower-strewers, that he mingled
as though on terms of familiar intercourse with the ordinary passers-by
in the streets, and never struck aside those who chanced to impede
his progress, and that he actually preferred those of low condition to
approach him on their feet, rather than in the more becoming attitude
of unconditional prostration, I reasoned with myself whether indeed he
could consistently be a person of well-established authority, or whether
I was not being again led away from my self-satisfaction by another
obliquity of barbarian logic. It was for this reason that I now welcomed
the admitted power which he has of incriminating persons in a variety
of punishable offences, and I perceived with an added satisfaction
that here, where this privilege is more fully understood, few meet him
without raising their hands to the upper part of their heads in token of
unquestioning submission; or, as one would interpret the symbolism into
actual words, meaning, “Thus, from this point to the underneath part of
our sandals, all between lies in the hollow of your comprehensive hand.”

There is a written jest among another barbarian nation that these among
whom I am tarrying, being by nature a people who take their pleasures
tragically, when they rise in the morning say, one to another, “Come,
behold; it is raining again as usual; let us go out and kill somebody.”
 Undoubtedly the pointed end of this adroit-witted saying may be found
in the circumstance that it is, indeed, as the proverb aptly claims,
raining on practically every occasion in life; while, to complete the
comparison, for many dynasties past this nation has been successfully
engaged in killing people (in order to promote their ultimate benefit
through a momentary inconvenience,) in every part of the world. Thus
the lines of parallel thought maintain a harmonious balance beyond the
general analogy of their sayings; but beneath this may be found an even
subtler edge, for in order to inure themselves to the requirement of a
high destiny their various games and manners of disportment are, with a
set purpose, so rigorously contested that in their progress most of the
weak and inefficient are opportunely exterminated.

There is a favourite and well-attended display wherein two opposing
bands, each clad in robes of a distinctive colour, stand in extended
lines of mutual defiance, and at a signal impetuously engage. The
design of each is by force or guile to draw their opponents into an
unfavourable position before an arch of upright posts, and then surging
irresistibly forward, to carry them beyond the limit and hurl them to
the ground. Those who successfully inflict this humiliation upon their
adversaries until they are incapable of further resistance are hailed
victorious, and sinking into a graceful attitude receive each a golden
cup from the magnanimous hands of a maiden chose to the service, either
on account of her peerless outline, the dignified position of her House,
or (should these incentives be obviously wanting,) because the chief
ones of her family are in the habit of contributing unstintingly to the
equipment of the triumphal band. There is also another kind of strife,
differing in its essentials only so far that all who engage therein are
provided with a curved staff, with which they may dexterously draw their
antagonists beyond the limits, or, should they fail to defend themselves
adequately, break the smaller bones of their ankles. But this form of
encounter, despite the use of these weapons, is really less fatal
than the other, for it is not a permissible act to club an antagonist
resentfully about the head with the staff, nor yet even to thrust
it rigidly against his middle body. From this moderation the public
countenance extended to the curved-pole game is contemptibly meagre when
viewed by the side of the overwhelming multitudes which pour along every
channel in order to witness a more than usually desperate trial of the
hurl-headlong variety (the sight, indeed, being as attractive to these
pale, blood-thirsty foreigners as an unusually large execution is
with us), and as a consequence the former is little reputed save among
maidens, the feeble, and those of timorous instincts.

Thus positioned, regarding a knowledge of their outside amusements, it
has always been one of the most prominent ambitions of this person’s
strategy to avoid being drawn into any encounter. At the same time,
the thought that the maidens of the household here (of whom there are
several, all so attractively proportioned that to compare them in a
spirit of definite preference would be distastefully presumptuous to
this person,) should regard me as one lacking in a sufficient display
of violence was not fragrant to my sense of refinement; so that when
Sir Philip, a little time after our arrival, related to me that on the
following day he and a chosen band were to be engaged in the match of a
cricket game against adversaries from the village, and asked whether I
cared to bear a part in the strife, I grasped the muscles of the upper
part of my left arm with my right hand--as I had frequently seen the
hardy and virile do when the subject of their powers had been raised
questioningly--and replied that I had long concealed an insatiable wish
to take such a part at a point where the conflict would be the most
revengefully contested.

Being thus inflexibly committed it became very necessary to arrange a
well-timed intervention (whether in the nature of bodily disorder, fire,
or demoniacal upheaval, a warning omen, or the death of some of our
chief antagonists), but before doing so I was desirous of understanding
how this contest, which had hitherto remained outside my experience, was
waged.

There is here one of benevolent rotundity in whose authority lie the
cavernous stores beneath the house and the vessels of gold and silver;
of menial rank admittedly, yet exacting a seemly deference from all
by the rich urbanity of his voice and the dignity of his massive
proportions. In the affable condescension of his tone, and the
discriminating encouragement of his attitude towards me on all
occasions, I have read a sympathetic concern over my welfare. Him I now
approached, and taking him aside, I first questioned him flatteringly
about his age and the extent of his yearly recompense, and then casually
inquired what in his language he would describe the nature of a cricket
to be.

“A cricket?” repeated the obliging person readily; “a cricket, sir, is a
hinsect. Something, I take it, after the manner of a grass-’opper.”

“Truly,” I agreed. “It is aptly likened. And, to continue the simile, a
game cricket--?”

“A game cricket?” he replied; “well, sir, naturally a game one would be
more gamier than the others, wouldn’t it?”

“The inference is unflinching,” I admitted, and after successfully
luring away his mind from any significance in the inquiry by asking him
whether the gift of a lacquered coffin or an embroidered shroud would be
the more regarded on parting, I left him.

His words, esteemed, for a definite reason were as the jade-clappered
melody of a silver bell. This trial of sportiveness, it became
clear,--less of a massacre than most of their amusements--is really
a rivalry of leapings and dexterity of the feet: a conflict of game
crickets or grass-hoppers, in the somewhat wide-angled obscurity of
their language, or, as we would more appropriately call it doubtless,
a festive competition in the similitude of high-spirited locusts. To
whatever degree the surrounding conditions might vary, there could no
longer be a doubt that the power of leaping high into the air was
the essential constituent of success in this barbarian match of
crickets--and in such an accomplishment this person excelled from the
time of his youth with a truly incredible proficiency. Can it be a
reproach, then, that when I considered this, and saw in a vision the
contempt of inferiority which I should certainly be able to inflict
upon these native crickets before the eyes of their maidens, even
the accumulated impassiveness of thirty-seven generations of Kong
fore-fathers broke down for the moment, and unable to restrain every
vestige of emotion I crept unperceived to the ancestral hall of Sir
Philip and there shook hands affectionately with myself before each of
the nine ironclad warriors about its walls before I could revert to
a becoming state of trustworthy unconcern. That night in my own upper
chamber I spent many hours in testing my powers and studying more
remarkable attitudes of locust flight, and I even found to be within
myself some new attainments of life-like agility, such as feigning the
continuous note of defiance with which the insect meets his adversary,
as remaining poised in the air for an appreciable moment at the summit
of each leap, and of conveying to the body a sudden and disconcerting
sideway movement in the course of its ascent. So immersed did I become
in the achievement of a high perfection that, to my never-ending
self-reproach, I failed to notice a supernatural visitation of undoubted
authenticity; for the next morning it was widely admitted that a certain
familiar demon of the house, which only manifests its presence on
occasions of tragic omen, had been heard throughout the night in
warning, not only beating its head and body against the walls and
doors in despair, but raising from time to time a wailing cry of
soul-benumbing bitterness.

With every assurance that the next letter, though equally distorted
in style and immature in expression, will contain the record of a
deteriorated but ever upward-striving son’s ultimate triumph.

KONG HO.




LETTER XI


 Concerning the game which we should call “Locusts,” and the
 deeper significance of its acts. The solicitous warning of
 one passing inwards and the complication occasioned by his
 ill-chosen words. Concerning that victory already dimly
 foreshadowed.


VENERATED SIRE,--This barbarian game of agile grass-hoppers is not
conducted in the best spirit of a really well-balanced display, and
although the one now inscribing his emotions certainly achieved a wide
popularity, and wore his fig leaves with becoming modesty, he has never
since been quite free from an overhanging doubt that the compliments and
genial remarks with which he was assailed owed their modulation to an
unsubstantial atmosphere of two-edged significance which for a period
enveloped all whom he approached; as in the faces of maidens concealed
behind fans when he passed, the down-drawn lips and up-raised eyes
of those of fuller maturity, the practice in most of his own kind
of turning aside, pressing their hands about their middle parts, and
bending forward into a swollen attitude devoid of grace, on the spur of
a sudden remembrance, and in the auspicious but undeniably embarrassing
manner in which all the unfledged ones of the village clustered about
his retiring footsteps, saluting him continually as one “James,” upon
whom had been conferred the gratifying title of “Sunny.” Thus may the
outline of the combat be recounted.

From each opposing group eleven were chosen as a band, and we of our
company putting on a robe of distinctive green (while they elected to
be regarded as an assemblage of brown crickets), we presently came to a
suitable spot where the trial was to be decided. So far this person
had reasonably assumed that at a preconcerted signal the contest would
begin, all rising into the air together, uttering cries of menace,
bounding unceasingly and in every way displaying the dexterity of our
proportions. Indeed, in the reasonableness of this expectation it cannot
be a matter for reproach to one of the green grass-hoppers--who need not
be further indicated--that he had already begun a well-simulated note
of challenge to those around clad in brown, and to leap upwards in
a preparatory essay, when the ever-alert Sir Philip took him
affectionately by the arm, on the plea that the seclusion of a
neighbouring pavilion afforded a desirable shade.

Beyond that point it is difficult to convey an accurately grouped and
fully spread-out design of the encounter. In itself the scheme and
intention of counterfeiting the domestic life and rivalries of two
opposing bands of insects was pleasantly conceived, and might have been
carried out with harmonious precision, but, after the manner of these
remote tribes, the original project had been overshadowed and the purity
of the imagination lost beneath a mass of inconsistent detail. To
this imperfection must it be laid that when at length this person was
recalled from the obscurity of the pagoda and the alluring society of
a maiden of the village, to whom he was endeavouring to expound the
strategy of the game, and called upon to engage actively in it, he
courteously admitted to those who led him forth that he had not the most
shadowy-outlined idea of what was required of him.

Nevertheless they bound about his legs a frilled armour, ingeniously
fashioned to represent the ribbed leanness of the insect’s shank,
encased his hands and feet in covers to a like purpose, and pressing
upon him a wooden club indicated that the time had come for him to
prove his merit by venturing alone into the midst of the eleven brown
adversaries who stood at a distance in poised and expectant attitudes.

Assuredly, benignant one, this sport of contending locusts began, as one
approached nearer to it, to wear no more pacific a face than if it had
been a carnage of the hurl-headlong or the curved-hook varieties. In
such a competition, it occurred to him, how little deference would be
paid to this one’s title of “Established Genius,” or how inadequately
would he be protected by his undoubted capacity of leaping upwards,
and even in a sideway direction, for no matter how vigorously he
might propel himself, or how successfully he might endeavour to remain
self-sustained in the air, the ill-destined moment could not be long
deferred when he must come down again into the midst of the eleven--all
doubtless concealing weapons as massive and fatally-destructive as his
own. This prospect, to a person of quiescent taste, whose chief
delight lay in contemplating the philosophical subtleties of the higher
Classics, was in itself devoid of glamour, but with what funereal
pigments shall he describe his sinking emotions when one of his own
band, approaching him as he went, whispered in his ear, “Look out at
this end; they kick up like the very devil. And their man behind the
wicket is really smart; if you give him half a chance he’ll have
your stumps down before you can say ‘knife.’” Shorn of its uncouth
familiarity, this was a charitable warning that they into whose
stronghold I was turning my footsteps--perhaps first deceiving my
alertness with a proffered friendship--would kick with the ferocity of
untamed demons, and that one in particular, whose description, to my
added despair, I was unable to retain, was known to possess a formidable
knife, with which it was his intention to cut off this person’s legs at
the first opportunity, before he could be accused of the act. Truly, “To
one whom he would utterly destroy Buddha sends a lucky dream.”

Behind lay the pagoda (though the fact that this one did admittedly turn
round for a period need not be too critically dwelt upon), with three
tiers of maidens, some already waving their hands as an encouraging
token; on each side a barrier of prickly growth inopportunely presented
itself, while in front the eleven kicking crickets stood waiting, and
among them lurked the one grasping a doubly-edged blade of a highly
proficient keenness.

There are occasional moments in the life of a person when he as the
inward perception of retiring for a few paces and looking back in order
to consider his general appearance and to judge how he is situated
with regard to himself, to review his past life in a spirit of judicial
severity, to arrange definitely upon a future composed entirely of acts
of benevolence, and to examine the working of destiny at large. In such
a scrutiny I now began to understand that it would perhaps have been
more harmonious to my love of contemplative repose if I had considered
the disadvantages closer before venturing into this barbarian region,
or, at least, if I had used the occasion profitably to advance an
argument tending towards a somewhat fuller allowance of taels from your
benevolent sleeve. Our own virtuous and flower-strewn land, it is true,
does not possess an immunity from every trifling drawback. The Hoang
Ho--to concede specifically the existence of some of these--frequently
bursts through its restraining barriers and indiscriminately sweeps
away all those who are so ill-advised as to dwell within reach of its
malignant influence. From time to time wars and insurrections are found
to be necessary, and no matter how morally-intentioned and humanely
conducted, they necessarily result in the violation, dismemberment or
extirpation of many thousand polite and dispassionate persons who have
no concern with either side. Towns are repeatedly consumed by fire,
districts scourged by leprosy, and provinces swept by famine. The storms
are admittedly more fatal than elsewhere, the thunderbolts larger, more
numerous, and all unerringly directed, while the extremities of heat and
cold render life really uncongenial for the greater part of each year.
The poor, having no money to secure justice, are evilly used, whereas
the wealthy, having too much, are assailed legally by the gross
and powerful for the purpose of extorting their riches. Robbers and
assassins lurk in every cave; vast hoards of pirates blacken the surface
of every river; and mandarins of the nine degrees must make a livelihood
by some means or other. By day, therefore, it is inadvisable to go forth
and encounter human beings, while none but the shallow-headed would risk
a meeting with the countless demons and vampires which move by night. To
one who has spent many moons among these foreign apparitions the absence
of drains, roads, illustrated message-parchments, maidens whose voices
may be heard protesting upon ringing a wire, loaves of conflicting
dimensions, persons who strive to put their faces upon every
advertisement, pens which emit fountains when carried in the pocket,
a profusion of make-strong foods, and an Encyclopaedia Mongolia, may
undoubtedly be mentioned as constituting a material deficiency. Affairs
are not being altogether reputably conducted during the crisis; it can
never be quite definitely asserted what the next action of the versatile
and high-spirited Dowager Empress will be; and here it is freely
contended that the Pure and Immortal Empire is incapable of remaining
in one piece for much longer. These, and other inconveniences of a like
nature, which the fastidious might distort into actual hardships, have
never been denied, yet at no period of the nine thousand years of our
civilisation has it been the custom to lure out the unwary, on the plea
of an agreeable entertainment, and then to abandon him into the society
of eleven club-bearing adversaries, one of whom may be depicted as in
the act of imparting an unnecessary polish to the edge of his already
preternaturally acute weapon, while those of his own band offer no
protection, and three tiers of very richly-dressed maidens encourage him
to his fate by refined gestures of approval.

Doubtless this person had unconsciously allowed his inner meditations
to carry him away, as it may be expressed, for when he emerged from this
strain of reverie it was to discover himself in the chariot-road and--so
incongruously may be the actions when the controlling intelligence is
withdrawn--even proceeding at a somewhat undignified pace in a direction
immediately opposed to an encounter with the brown locusts. From
this mortifying position he was happily saved by emerging from these
thought-dreams before it was too late to return, and, also, if the
detail is not too insignificant to be related, by the fact that certain
chosen runners from his own company had reached a point in the road
before him, and now stood joining their outstretched arms across the
passage and raising gravity-dispelling cries. Smiling acquiescently,
therefore, this person returned in their midst, and receiving a new
weapon, his own club having been absent-mindedly mislaid, he again set
forth warily to the encounter.

Yet in this he did not altogether neglect a discreet prudence. The
sympathetic person to whom he was indebted for the pointed allusion had
specifically declared that they who used their feet with the desperate
savagery of baffled spectres guarded the nearer limits of their
position, the intention of his timely hint assuredly being that I should
seek to approach from the opposite end, where, doubtless, the more
humane and conciliatory grass-hoppers were assembled. Thus guided I now
set forth in a widely-circuitous direction, having the point where I
meant to open an attack clearly before my eyes, yet seeking to deliver
a more effective onslaught by reaching it to some extent unperceived and
to this end creeping forward in the protecting shadow of the long grass
and untrimmed herbage.

Whether the one already referred to had incapably failed to express his
real meaning, or whether he was tremulous by nature and inordinately
self-deficient, concerns the narration less than the fact that he had
admittedly produced a state of things largely in excess of the actual.
There is no longer any serviceable pretext for maintaining that
those guarding any point of their position were other than mild and
benevolent, while the only edged weapon displayed was one courteously
produced to aid this person’s ineffectual struggles to extricate himself
when, by some obscure movement, he had most ignobly entangled his
pigtail about the claws of his sandal.

Ignorant of this, the true state of things, I was still advancing subtly
when one wearing the emblems of our band appeared from among the brown
insects and came towards me. “Courage!” I exclaimed in a guarded tone,
raising my head cautiously and rejoiced to find that I should not be
alone. “Here is one clad in green bearing succour, who will, moreover,
obstinately defend his stumps to the last extremity.”

“That’s right,” replied the opportune person agreeably; “we need a few
like that. But do get up on your hind legs and come along, there’s a
good fellow. You can play at bears in the nursery when we get back, if
you want.”

Certainly one can simulate the movements of wild animals in a
market-garden if the impersonation is thought to be desirable, yet
the reasonable analogy of the saying is elusive in the extreme, and
I followed the ally who had thus betrayed my presence with a deep-set
misgiving although in the absence of a more trustworthy guide, and in
the suspicion that some point of my every ordinary strategy had been
inept, I was compelled to mould myself identically into his advice.

Scarcely had he left me, and I was endeavouring to dispel any idea of
treachery towards those about by actions of graceful courtesy, when
one--unworthy of burial--standing a score of paces distant, (to whom,
indeed, this person was at the moment bowing with almost passionate
vehemence, inspired by the conviction that he, for his part, was
engaged in a like attention,) suddenly cast a missile--which, somewhat
double-facedly, he had hitherto held concealed in his closed hand--with
undeviating force and accuracy. So unexpected was the movement,
so painfully-impressed the vindictive contact, that I should have
instinctively seized the offensively-directed object and contemptuously
hurled it back again, if the consequence of the blow had not deprived
my mind of all retaliatory ambitions. In this emergency was manifested
a magnanimous act worthy of the incense of a poem, for a person standing
immediately by, seeing how this one was balanced in his emotions, picked
up the missile, and although one of the foremost of the opposing band,
very obligingly flung it back at the assailant. Even an outcast would
not have passed this without a suitable tribute, and turning to him,
I was remarking appreciatively that men were not divided by seas and
wooden barriers, but by the unchecked and conflicting lusts of the mind,
when the unclean and weed-nurtured traitor twenty paces distant, taking
a degraded advantage from this person’s attitude, again propelled his
weapon with an even more concentrated perfidy than before. At this new
outrage every brown cricket shrank from the attitude of alert vigour
which hitherto he had maintained, and as though to disassociate
themselves from the stain of complicity all crossed over and took up new
positions.

Up to this point, majestic head, in order to represent the adventure
in its proper sequence, it has been advisable to present the details as
they arose before the eyes of a reliable and dispassionate gazer. Now,
however, it is no less seemly to declare that this barbarian sport
of leaping insects is not so discreditably shallow as it had at first
appeared, while in every action there may be found an apt but hidden
symbol. Thus the presence of the two green locusts in the midst of
others of a dissimilar nature represents the unending strife by which
even the most pacific are ever surrounded. The fragile erection of
sticks (behind which this person at first sought to defend himself
until led into a more exposed position by one garbed in white,) may be
regarded as the home and altar, and adequately depicts the hollowness
of the protection it affords and the necessity of reliantly emerging to
defy an invader rather than lurking discreditably among its recesses.
The missile is the equivalent of a precise and immediate danger, the
wooden club the natural instinct for defence with which all living
creatures are endowed, so that when the peril is for the time driven
away the opportunity is at hand for the display of virtuous amusements,
the exchanging of hospitality, and the beating of professional drums as
we would say. Thus, at the next attack the one sharing the enterprise
with me struck the missile so proficiently that its recovery engaged the
attention of all our adversaries, and then began to exhibit his powers
by running and leaping towards me. Recognising that the actual moment of
the display had arrived, this person at once emitted a penetrating cry
of concentrated challenge, and also began to leap upwards and about,
and with so much energy that the highly achieved limits of his flight
surprised even himself.

As for the bystanders, esteemed, those who opposed us, and the members
of our own band, although this leaping sportiveness is a competition
more regarded and practised among all orders than the pursuit of
commercial eminence, or even than the allurements of the sublimest
Classics, it may be truly imagined that never before had they witnessed
so remarkable a game cricket. From the pagoda a loud cry of wonder
acclaimed the dexterity of this person’s efforts; the three tiers of
maidens climbed one upon another in their anxiety to lose no detail of
the adventure, and outstanders from distant points began to assemble.
The brown enemy at once abandoned themselves to a panic, and for the
most part cast themselves incapably to the ground, rolling from side to
side in an access of emotion; the two arbiters clad in white conferred
together, doubtless on the uselessness of further contest, while the
ally who had summoned me to take a part instead of being encouraged to
display his agility in a like manner continued to run slavishly from
point to point, while I overcame the distances in a series of inspired
bounds.

In the meanwhile the sounds of encouragement from the ever-increasing
multitude grew like the falling of a sudden coast storm among the ripe
leaves of a tea-plantation, and with them the voices of many calling
upon my name and inciting me to further and even higher achievements
reached my ears. Not to grow small in the eyes of these estimable
persons I continued in my flight, and abandoning all set movements and
limits, I began to traverse the field in every direction, becoming more
proficient with each effort, imparting to myself a sideway and even
backward motion while yet in the upper spaces, remaining poised for an
appreciable period, and lightly, yet with graceful ease, avoiding the
embraces of those who would have detained me. Undoubtedly I could have
maintained this supremacy until our band might justly have claimed the
reward, had not the flattering cries of approval caused an indiscreet
mistake, for the alarm being spread in the village that a conflagration
of imposing ferocity was raging, an ornamental chariot conveying a band
of warriors clad in brass armour presently entered into the strife, and
discovering no fire to occupy their charitable energies they misguidedly
honoured this offensive person by propelling a solid column of the
purest and most refreshing water against his ignoble body when at the
point of his highest flight. This introduction of a thunderbolt into the
everyday life of an insect must be of questionable authenticity, yet
not feeling sufficiently instructed in the lesser details of the
sportiveness to challenge the device, I suffered myself to be led
towards the pavilion with no more struggling than enough to remove the
ignominy of an unresisting surrender, pleasantly remarking to those
who bore me along that to a person of philosophical poise the written
destiny was as apparent in the falling leaf as in the rising sun,
pointing the saying thus: “Although the Desert of Shan-tz is boundless,
and mankind number a million million, yet in it Li-hing encountered his
mother-in-law.” Changing to meet another of our company setting forth
with a club to make the venture, I was permitted for a moment to
engage him; whereupon thrusting into his hand a leather charm against
ill-directed efforts, and instructing him to bind it about his head, I
encouraged him with the imperishable watch-word of the Emperor Tsin Su,
“The stars are indeed small, but their light carries as far as that of
the full moon.”

At the steps of the pagoda so great was the throng of those who would
have overwhelmed me with their gracious attention, that had not this
person’s neck become practically automatic by ceaseless use of late, he
would have been utterly unequal to the emergency. As it was, he could
only bestow a superficial hand-wave upon a company of gold-embroidered
musicians who greeted his return with appropriate melody, and a glance
of well-indicated regret that he had no fuller means of conveying his
complicated emotions, in the direction of the uppermost tier of maidens.
Then the awaiting Sir Philip took him firmly towards the inner part of
the pavilion, and announced, so adroitly and with such high-spirited
vigour had this one maintained the conflict, that it had been resolutely
agreed on all sides not to make a test of his competence any further.

Thereupon a band of very sumptuously arrayed nymphs drew near with
offerings of liquid fat and a variety of crimson fruit, which it is
customary to grind together on the platter--unapproachable in the
result, certainly, yet incredibly elusive to the unwary in the manner of
bruising, and practically ineradicable upon the more delicate shades
of silk garment. In such a situation the one who is now relating the
various incidents of the day may be imagined by a broad-minded and
affectionate sire: partaking of this native fruit and oil, and from time
to time expressing his insatiable anguish that he continually fails
to become more proficient in controlling the oblique movements of the
viands, while the less successful crickets are constrained to persevere
in the combat, and the ever-present note of evasive purport is raised
by a voice from behind a screen exclaiming, “Out afore? That he may have
been, but do he think we was a-going to give he out afore? No, maaster,
us doant a-have a circus every day hereabouts.”

Thus may this imagination of competitive locusts be set forth to
the end. If a fuller proof of what an unostentatious self-effacement
hesitates to enlarge upon were required, it might be found in the
barbarian printed leaf, for the next day this person saw a public record
of the strife, in which his own name was followed by a numerical emblem
signifying that he had not stumbled or proved incompetent in any one
particular. Sir Philip, I beheld with pained surprise, had obtusely
suffered himself to be caught out in the committal of fifty-nine set
offences.

With a not unnatural anticipation that, as a result of this painstaking
description, this person will find two well-equipped camps of contending
locusts in Yuen-ping on his return.

KONG HO.




LETTER XII


 Concerning the obvious misunderstanding which has entwined
 itself about a revered parent’s faculties of passionless
 discrimination. The all-water disportment and the two, of
 different sexes, who after regarding me conflictingly from
 the beginning, ended in a like but inverted manner.


VENERATED SIRE,--Your gem-adorned letter containing a thousand burnished
words of profuse reproach has entered my diminished soul in the form
of an equal number of rusty barbs. Can it be that the incapable
person whom, as you truly say, you sent, “to observe the philosophical
subtleties of the barbarians, to study their dynastical records and to
associate liberally with the venerable and dignified,” has, in your
own unapproachable felicity of ceremonial expression, “according to
a discreet whisper from many sources, chiefly affected the society of
tea-house maidens, the immature of both sexes, doubtful characters of
all classes, and criminals awaiting trial; has evinced an unswerving
affinity towards light amusement and entertainments of a no-class kind;
and in place of a wise aloofness, befitting a wearer of the third Gold
Button and the Horn Belt-clasp, in situations of critical perplexity,
seems by his own ingenuous showing to have maintained an unparalleled
aptitude for behaving either with the crystalline simplicity of a
Kan-su earth-tiller, or the misplaced buffoonery of a seventh-grade
body-writher taking the least significant part in an ill-equipped Swatow
one-cash Hall of Varied Melodies.” Assuredly, if your striking and
well-chosen metaphors were not more unbalanced than the ungainly
attitude of a one-legged hunchback crossing a raging torrent by means
of a slippery plank on a stormy night, they would cause the very acutest
bitterness to the throat of a dutiful and always high-stepping son.
There is an apt saying, however, “A quarrel between two soldiers in the
market-place becomes a rebellion in the outskirts,” and when this person
remembers that many thousand li of mixed elements flow between him and
his usually correct and dispassionate sire, he is impelled to take a
mild and tolerant attitude towards the momentary injustice brought about
by the weakness of approaching old age, the vile-intentioned mendacity
of outcasts envious of the House of Kong, and, perchance, the irritation
brought on by a too lavish indulgence in your favourite dish of stewed
mouse.

Having thus re-established himself in the clear-sighted affection of an
ever mild and perfect father, and cleansed the ground of all possible
misunderstandings in the future, this person will concede the fact that,
not to stand beneath the faintest shadow of an implied blemish in your
sympathetic eyes, he had no sooner understood the attitude in which he
had been presented than he at once plunged into the virtuous society of
a band of the sombre and benevolent.

These, so far as his intelligence enables him to grasp the position,
may be reasonably accepted as the barbarian equivalent of those very
high-minded persons who in our land devote their whole lives secretly
to killing others whom they consider the chief deities do not really
approve of; for although they are not permitted here, either by written
law or by accepted custom, to perform these meritorious actions, they
are so intimately initiated into the minds and councils of the Upper
Ones that they are able to pronounce very severe judgments of torture--a
much heavier penalty than merely being assassinated--upon all who remain
outside their league. As some of the most objurgatory of these alliances
do not number more than a score of persons, it is inevitable that the
ultimate condition of the whole barbarian people must be hazardous in
the extreme.

Having associated myself with this class sufficiently to escape their
vindictive pronouncements, and freely professed an unswerving adherence
to their rites, I next sought out the priests of other altars, intending
by a seemly avowal to each in turn to safeguard my future existence
effectually. This I soon discovered to be beyond the capacity of an
ordinary lifetime, for whereas we, with four hundred million subjects
find three religions to be sufficient to meet every emergency, these
irresolute island children, although numbering us only as one to ten,
vacillate among three hundred; and even amid this profusion it is
asserted that most of the barbarians are unable to find any temple
exactly conforming to their requirements, and after writing to the paper
to announce the fact, abandon the search in despair.

It was while I was becoming proficient in the inner subtleties of one
of these orders--they who drink water on all occasions and wear a
badge--that a maiden of some authority among them besought my aid for
the purpose of amusing a band which she was desirous of propitiating
into the adoption of this badge. It is possible that in the immature
confidence of former letters this person may already have alluded to
certain maidens with words of courteous esteem, but it is now necessary
to admit finally that in the presence of this same Helena they would
all appear as an uninviting growth of stunted and deformed poppies
surrounding a luxuriant chrysanthemum. At the presumptuous thought of
describing her illimitable excellences my fingers become claw-like in
their confessed inadequacy to hold a sufficiently upright brush; yet
without undue confidence it may be set down that her hands resembled the
two wings of a mandarin drake in their symmetrical and changing motion,
her hair as light and radiant-pointed as the translucent incense cloud
floating before the golden Buddha of Shan-Si, thin white satin stretched
tightly upon polished agate only faintly comparable to her jade cheeks,
while her eyes were more unfathomable than the crystal waters of the
Keng-kiang, and within their depths her pure and magnanimous thoughts
could be dimly seen to glide like the gold and silver carp beneath the
sacred river.

When this insurpassable being approached me with the flattering
petition already alluded to, my gratified emotions clashed together
uncontrollably with the internal feeling of many volcanoes in movement,
and my organs of expression became so entangled at the condescension of
her melodious voice being directly addressed to one so degraded, that
for several minutes I was incapable of further acquiescence than that
conveyed by an adoring silence and an unchanging smile. No formality
appeared worthy to greet her by, no expression of self-contempt
sufficiently offensive to convey to her enlightenment my own sense of
a manifold inferiority, and doubtless I should have remained in a
transfixed attitude until she had at length turned aside, had not your
seasonable reference to a Swatow limb-contorter struck me heavily and
abruptly turned off the source of my agreement. Might not this all-water
entertainment, it occurred to this one, consist in enticing him to drink
a potion made unsuspectedly hot, in projecting him backwards into a vat
of the same liquid, or some similar device for the pleasurable amusement
of those around, which would come within the boundaries of your refined
disapproval? As one by himself there was no indignity that this person
would not cheerfully have submitted to, but the inexorable cords of an
ingrained filial regard suddenly pulled him sideways and into another
direction.

“But, Mr. Kong,” exclaimed the bee-lipped maiden, when I had explained
(as being less involved to her imagination,) that I was under a vow,
“we have been relying upon you. Could you not”--and here she dropped her
eyes and picked them up again with a fluttering motion which our lesser
ones are, to an all-wise end, quite unacquainted with--“could you not
unvow yourself for one night, just to please ME?”

At these words, the illuminated proficiency of her glance, and her
honourable resolution to implicate me in the display by head or feet,
the ever-revered image of a just and obedience-loving father ceased to
have any further tangible influence. Let it be remembered that there
is a deep saying, “A virtuous woman will cause more evil than ten river
pirates.” As for the person who is recording his incompetence, the room
and all those about began to engulf him in an ever-increasing circular
motion, his knees vibrated together with unrestrained pliancy, and
concentrating his voice to indicate by the allegory some faint measure
of his emotion, he replied passionately, “Let the amusement referred to
take the form of sitting in a boiling cauldron exposed to the derision
of all beholders, this one will now enter it wearing yellow silk
trousers.”

It is characteristic of these illogical out-countries that the all-water
diversion did not, as a matter to record, concern itself with that
liquid in any detail, beyond the contents of a glass vessel from which a
venerable person, who occupied a raised chair, continually partook. This
discriminating individual spoke so confidently of the beneficial action
of the fluid, and so unswervingly described my own feelings at the
moment--as of head giddiness, an inexactitude of speech, and no clear
definition of where the next step would be arrived at--as the common
lot of all who did not consume regularly, that when that same Helena
had passed on to speak to another, I left the hall unobserved and drank
successive portions, in each case, as the night was cold, prudently
adding a measure of the native rice spirit. His advice had been
well-directed, for with the fourth portion I suddenly found all
doubtful and oppressive visions withdrawn, and a new and exhilarating
self-confidence raised in their place. In this agreeable temper I
returned to the place of meeting to find a priest of one of the lesser
orders relating a circumstance whereby he had encountered a wild maiden
in the woods, who had steadfastly persisted that she was one of a
band of seven (this being the luckiest protective number among the
superstitious). Though unable to cause their appearance, she had gone
through a most precise examination at his hands without deviating in the
slightest particular, whereupon distrusting the outcome of the strife,
the person who was relating the adventure had withdrawn breathless.

When this versatile lesser priest had finished the narration, and
the applause, which clearly showed that those present approved of the
solitary maiden’s discreet stratagem, had ceased, the one who occupied
the central platform, rising, exclaimed loudly, “Mr. Kong will next
favour us with a contribution, which will consist, I am informed, of a
Chinese tale.”

Now there chanced to be present a certain one who had already become
offensive to me by the systematic dexterity with which he had planted
his inopportune shadow between the sublime-souled Helena and any other
who made a movement to approach her heaven-dowered outline. When this
presumptuous and ill-nurtured outcast, who was, indeed, then seated
by the side of the enchanting maiden last referred to, heard the
announcement he said in a voice feigned to reach her peach-skin ear
alone, yet intentionally so modulated as to penetrate the furthest limit
of the room, “A Chinese tale! Why, assuredly, that must be a pig-tail.”
 At this unseemly shaft many of those present allowed themselves to
become immoderately amused, and even the goat-like sage who had
called upon my name concealed his face behind an open hand, but the
amiably-disposed Helena, after looking at the undiscriminating youth
coldly for a moment, deliberately rose and moved to a vacant spot at a
distance. Encouraged by this fragrant act of sympathy I replied with a
polite bow to indicate the position, “On the contrary, the story which
it is now my presumptuous intention to relate will contain no reference
whatever to the carefully-got-up one occupying two empty seats in the
front row,” and without further introduction began the history of Kao
and his three brothers, to which I had added the title, “The Three
Gifts.”

At the conclusion of this classical example of the snares ever lying
around the footsteps of the impious, I perceived that the jocular
stripling, whom I had so delicately reproved, was no longer present.
Doubtless he had been unable to remain in the same room with the
commanding Helena’s high-spirited indignation, and anticipating that in
consequence there would now be no obstacle to her full-faced benignity,
I drew near with an appropriate smile.

It is somewhere officially recorded, “There is only one man who knew
with accurate certainty what a maiden’s next attitude would be, and he
died young of surprise.” As I approached I had the sensation of passing
into so severe an atmosphere of rigid disfavour, that the ingratiating
lines upon my face became frozen in its intensity, despite the ineptness
of their expression. Unable to penetrate the cause of my offence, I
made a variety of agreeable remarks, until finding that nothing tended
towards a becoming reconciliation, I gradually withdrew in despair, and
again turned my face in the direction of that same accommodation which I
had already found beneath the sign of an Encompassed Goat. Here, by the
sarcasm of destiny, I encountered the person who had drawn the slighting
analogy between this one’s pig-tail and his ability as a story-teller.
For a brief space of time the ultimate development of the venture
was doubtfully poised, but recognising in each other’s features the
overhanging cloud of an allied pang, the one before me expressed a
becoming contrition for the jest, together with a proffered cup. Not to
appear out-classed I replied in a suitable vein, involving the supply
of more vessels; whereupon there succeeded many more vessels, called for
both singly and in harmonious unison, and the reappearance of numerous
bright images, accompanied by a universal scintillation of meteor-like
iridescence. In this genial and greatly-enlarged spirit we returned
affably together to the hall, and entered unperceived at the moment when
the one who made the announcements was crying aloud, “According to the
programme the next item should have been a Chinese poem, but as Mr. Kong
Ho appears to have left the building, we shall pass him over--”

“What Ho?” exclaimed the somewhat impetuous one by my side, stepping
forward indignantly and mounting the platform in his affectionate zeal.
“No one shall pass over my old and valued friend--this Ho--while I have
a paw to raise. Step forward, Mandarin, and let them behold the inventor
and sole user of the justly far-famed G. R. Ko-Ho hair restorer--sent in
five guinea bottles to any address on receipt of four penny stamps--as
he appeared in his celebrated impersonation of the human-faced Swan at
Doll and Edgar’s. Come on, oh, Ho!”

“Assuredly,” I replied, striving to follow him, “yet with the wary
greeting, ‘Slowly, slowly; walk slowly,’ engraved upon my mind, for the
barrier of these convoluted stairs--” but at this word a band of maidens
passed out hastily, and in the tumult I reached the dais and began
Weng Chi’s immortal verses, entitled “The Meandering Flight,” which had
occupied me three complete days and nights in the detail of rendering
the allusions into well-balanced similitudes and at the same time
preserving the skilful evasion of all conventional rules which raises
the original to so sublime a height.

 The voice of one singing at the dawn;
 The seven harmonious colours in the sky;
 The meeting by the fountain;
 The exchange of gifts, and the sound of the processional drum;
 The emotion of satisfaction in each created being;
 This is the all-prominent indication of the Spring.

 The general disinclination to engage in laborious tasks;
 The general readiness to consume voluminous potions on any
 pretext.
 The deserted appearance of the city and the absence of the
 come-in motion at every door;
 The sportiveness of maidens, and even those of maturer age,
 ethereally clad, upon the shore.
 The avowed willingness of merchants to dispose of their wares
 for half the original sum.
 This undoubtedly is the Summer.

 The yellow tea leaf circling as it falls;
 The futile wheeling of the storm-tossed swan;
 The note of the marble lute at evening by the pool;
 The immobile cypress seen against the sun.
 The unnecessarily difficult examination paper.
 All these things are suggestive of the Autumn.

 The growing attraction of a well-lined couch.
 The obsequious demeanour of message-bearers, charioteers, and
 the club-armed keepers of peace.
 The explosion of innumerable fire-crackers round the convivial
 shines,
 The gathering together of relations who at all other times
 shun each other markedly.
 The obtrusive recollection of a great many things contrary to
 a spoken vow, and the inflexible purpose to be more
 resolute in future.
 These in turn invariably attend each Winter.

It certainly had not presented itself to me before that the words
“invariably attend” are ill-chosen, but as I would have uttered them
their inelegance became plain, and this person made eight conscientious
attempts to soften down their harsh modulation by various interchanges.
He was still persevering hopefully when he of chief authority approached
and requested that the one who was thus employed and that same other
would leave the hall tranquilly, as the all-water entertainment was
at an end, and an attending slave was in readiness to extinguish the
lanterns.

“Yet,” I protested unassumingly, “that which has so far been expressed
is only in the semblance of an introductory ode. There follow--”

“You must not argue with the Chair,” exclaimed another interposing his
voice. “Whatever the Chair rules must be accepted.”

“The innuendo is flat-witted,” I replied with imperturbable dignity, but
still retaining my hold upon the rail. “When this person so far loses
his sense of proportion as to contend with an irrational object, devoid
of faculties, let the barb be cast. After that introduction dealing with
the four seasons, the twelve gong-strokes of the day are reviewed in a
like fashion. These in turn give place to the days of the month, then
the moons of the year, and finally the years of the cycle.”

“That’s fair,” exclaimed the perverse though well-meaning youth, whom I
was beginning to recognise as the cause of some misunderstanding among
us. “If you don’t want any more of his poem--and I don’t blame you--my
pal Ho, who is one of the popular Flip-Flap Troupe, offers to do some
trick cycle-riding on his ears. What more can you expect?”

“We expect a policeman very soon,” replied another severely. “He has
already been sent for.”

“In that case,” said the one who had so persistently claimed me as
an ally, “perhaps I can do you a service by directing him here”; and
leaving this person to extricate himself by means of a reassuring
silence and some of the larger silver pieces of the Island, he vanished
hastily.

With some doubt whether or not this deviation into the society of the
professedly virtuous, ending as it admittedly does in an involvement,
may not be deemed ill-starred; yet hopeful.

KONG HO.


 THE THREE GIFTS

 Related by Kong Ho on the occasion of the all-water
 disportment, under the circumstances previously set forth.

BEYOND the limits of the township of Yang-chow there dwelt a rich
astrologer named Wei. Reading by his skilful interpretation of the
planets that he would shortly Pass Above, he called his sons Chu, Shan,
and Hing to his side and distributed his wealth impartially among them.
To Chu he gave his house containing a gold couch; to Shan a river with
a boat; to Hing a field in which grew a prolific orange-tree. “Thus
provided for,” he continued, “you will be able to live together in
comfort, the resources of each supplying the wants of the others in
addition to his own requirements. Therefore when I have departed let it
be your first care to sacrifice everything else I leave, so that I also,
in the Upper Air, may not be left destitute.”

Now in addition to these three sons Wei also had another, the youngest,
but one of so docile, respectful, and self-effacing a disposition that
he was frequently overlooked to the advantage of his subtle, ambitious,
and ingratiating brothers. This youth, Kao, thinking that the occasion
certainly called for a momentary relaxation of his usual diffidence,
now approached his father modestly, and begged that he also might be
included to some trivial degree in his bounty.

This reasonable petition involved Wei in an embarrassing perplexity.
Although he had forgotten Kao completely in the division, he had now
definitely concluded the arrangement; nor, to his failing powers, did it
appear possible to make a just allotment on any other lines. “How can a
person profitably cut up an orange-tree, a boat, an inlaid couch, or
a house?” he demanded. “Who can divide a flowing river, or what but
unending strife can arise from regarding an open field in anything
but its entirety? Assuredly six cohesive objects cannot be apportioned
between four persons.” Yet he could not evade the justice of Kao’s
implied rebuke, so drawing to his side a jade cabinet he opened it, and
from among the contents he selected an ebony staff, a paper umbrella,
and a fan inscribed with a mystical sentence. These three objects he
placed in Kao’s hands, and with his last breath signified that he should
use them discreetly as the necessity arose.

When the funeral ceremonies were over, Chu, Shan, and Hing came
together, and soon moulded their covetous thoughts into an agreed
conspiracy. “Of what avail would be a boat or a river if this person
sacrificed the nets and appliances by which the fish are ensnared?”
 asked Shan. “How little profit would lie in an orange-tree and a field
without cattle and the implements of husbandry!” cried Hing. “One cannot
occupy a gold couch in an empty house both by day and night,” remarked
Chu stubbornly. “How inadequate, therefore, would such a provision be
for three.”

When Kao understood that his three brothers had resolved to act in this
outrageous manner he did not hesitate to reproach them; but not being
able to contend against him honourably, they met him with ridicule.
“Do not attempt to rule us with your wooden staff,” they cried
contemptuously. “Sacrifice IT if your inside is really sincere. And,
in the meanwhile, go and sit under your paper umbrella and wield
your inscribed fan, while we attend to our couch, our boat, and our
orange-tree.”

“Truly,” thought Kao to himself when they had departed, “their words
were irrationally offensive, but among them there may stand out a
pointed edge. Our magnanimous father is now bereft of both comforts
and necessities, and although an ebony rod is certainly not much in the
circumstances, if this person is really humanely-intentioned he will not
withhold it.” With this charitable design Kao build a fire before the
couch (being desirous, out of his forgiving nature, to associate his
eldest brother in the offering), and without hesitation sacrificed the
most substantial of his three possessions.

It here becomes necessary to explain that in addition to being an expert
astrologer, Wei was a far-seeing magician. The rod of unimpressionable
solidity was in reality a charm against decay, and its hidden virtues
being thus destroyed, a contrary state of things naturally arose, so
that the next morning it was found that during the night the gold couch
had crumbled away into a worthless dust.

Even this manifestation did not move the three brothers, although the
geniality of Shan and Hing’s countenances froze somewhat towards Chu.
Nevertheless Chu still possessed a house, and by pointing out that they
could live as luxuriantly as before on the resources of the river and
the field and the tree, he succeeded in maintaining his position among
them.

After seven days Kao reflected again. “This avaricious person still has
two objects, both of which he owes to his revered father’s imperishable
influence,” he admitted conscience-stricken, “while the being in
question has only one.” Without delay he took the paper umbrella and
ceremoniously burned it, scattering the ashes this time upon Shan’s
river. Like the rod the umbrella also possessed secret virtues, its
particular excellence being a curse against clouds, wind demons,
thunderbolts and the like, so that during the night a great storm raged,
and by the morning Shan’s boat had been washed away.

This new calamity found the three brothers more obstinately perverse
than ever. It cannot be denied that Hing would have withdrawn from the
guilty confederacy, but they were as two to one, and prevailed, pointing
out that the house still afforded shelter, the river yielded some of the
simpler and inferior fish which could be captured from the banks, and
the fruitfulness of the orange-tree was undiminished.

At the end of seven more days Kao became afflicted with doubt. “There is
no such thing as a fixed proportion or a set reckoning between a dutiful
son and an embarrassed sire,” he confessed penitently. “How incredibly
profane has been this person’s behaviour in not seeing the obligation in
its unswerving necessity before.” With this scrupulous resolve Kao took
his last possession, and carrying it into the field he consumed it
with fire beneath Hing’s orange-tree. The fan, in turn, also had hidden
properties, its written sentence being a spell against drought, hot
winds, and the demons which suck the nourishment from all crops. In
consequence of the act these forces were called into action, and before
another day Hing’s tree had withered away.

It is said with reason, “During the earthquake men speak the truth.” At
this last disaster the impious fortitude of the three brothers suddenly
gave way, and cheerfully admitting their mistake, each committed
suicide, Chu disembowelling himself among the ashes of his couch, Shan
sinking beneath the waters of his river, and Hing hanging by a rope
among the branches of his own effete orange-tree.

When they had thus fittingly atoned for their faults the imprecation was
lifted from off their possessions. The couch was restored by magic
art to its former condition, the boat was returned by a justice-loving
person into whose hands it had fallen lower down the river, and
the orange-tree put out new branches. Kao therefore passed into an
undiminished inheritance. He married three wives, to commemorate the
number of his brothers, and had three sons, whom he called Chu, Shan,
and Hing, for a like purpose. These three all attained to high office in
the State, and by their enlightened morals succeeded in wiping all the
discreditable references to others bearing the same names from off the
domestic tablets.

From this story it will be seen that by acting virtuously, yet with an
observing discretion, on all occasions, it is generally possible not
only to rise to an assured position, but at the same time unsuspectedly
to involve those who stand in our way in a just destruction.




LETTER XIII


 Concerning a state of necessity; the arisings engendered
 thereby, and the turned-away face of those ruling the
 literary quarter of the city towards one possessing a style.
 This foreign manner of feigning representations, and
 concerning my dignified portrayal of two.


VENERATED SIRE,--It is now more than three thousand years ago that the
sublime moralist Tcheng How, on being condemned by a resentful official
to a lengthy imprisonment in a very inadequate oil jar, imperturbably
replied, “As the snail fits his impliant shell, so can the wise adapt
themselves to any necessity,” and at once coiled himself up in the
restricted space with unsuspected agility. In times of adversity this
incomparable reply has often shone as a steadfast lantern before my
feet, but recently it struck my senses with a heavier force, for
upon presenting myself on the last occasion at the place of exchange
frequented by those who hitherto have carried out your spoken promise
with obliging exactitude, and at certain stated intervals freely granted
to this person a sufficiency of pieces of gold, merely requiring
in return an inscribed and signet-bearing record of the fact, I was
received with no diminution of sympathetic urbanity, indeed, but with
hands quite devoid of outstretched fulness.

In a small inner chamber, to which I was led upon uttering courteous
protests, one of solitary authority explained how the deficiency had
arisen, but owing to the skill with which he entwined the most intricate
terms in unbroken fluency, the only impression left upon my superficial
mind was, that the person before me was imputing the scheme for
my despoilment less to any mercenary instinct on the part of his
confederates, than to a want of timely precision maintained by one who
seemed to bear an agreeable-sounding name somewhat similar to your own,
and who, from the difficulty of reaching his immediate ear, might be
regarded as dwelling in a distant land. Encouraged by this conciliatory
profession (and seeing no likelihood of gaining my end otherwise), I
thereupon declared my willingness that the difference lying between us
should be submitted to the pronouncement of dispassionate omens, either
passing birds, flat and round sticks, the seeds of two oranges, wood and
fire, water poured out upon the ground or any equally reliable sign as
he himself might decide. However, in spite of his honourable assurances,
he was doubtless more deeply implicated in the adventure than he
would admit, for at this scrupulous proposal the benignant mask of his
expression receded abruptly, and, striking a hidden bell, he waved his
hands and stood up to signify that further justice was denied me.

In this manner a state of destitution calling for the fullest acceptance
of Tcheng How’s impassive philosophy was created, nor had many
hours faded before the first insidious temptation to depart from his
uncompromising acquiescence presented itself.

At that time there was no one in whom I reposed a larger-sized piece
of confidence (in no way involving sums of money,) than one officially
styled William Beveledge Greyson, although, profiting by our own custom,
it is unusual for those really intimate with his society to address him
fully, unless the occasion should be one of marked ceremony. Forming a
resolution, I now approached this obliging person, and revealing to him
the cause of the emergency, I prayed that he would advise me, as one
abandoned on a strange Island, by what handicraft or exercise of skill I
might the readiest secure for the time a frugal competence.

“Why, look here, aged man,” at once replied the lavish William Greyson,
“don’t worry yourself about that. I can easily let you have a few pounds
to tide you over. You will probably hear from the bank in the course
of a few days or weeks, and it’s hardly worth while doing anything
eccentric in the meantime.”

At this delicately-worded proposal I was about to shake hands with
myself in agreement, when the memory of Tcheng How’s resolute submission
again possessed me, and seeing that this would be an unworthy betrayal
of destiny I turned aside the action, and replying evasively that the
world was too small to hold himself and another equally magnanimous, I
again sought his advice.

“Now what silly upside-down idea is it that you’ve got into that Chinese
puzzle you call your head, Kong?” he replied; for this same William was
one who habitually gilded unpalatable truths into the semblance of
a flattering jest. “Whenever you turn off what you are saying into
a willow-pattern compliment and bow seventeen times like an animated
mandarin, I know that you are keeping something back. Be a man and
a brother, and out with it,” and he struck me heavily upon the left
shoulder, which among the barbarians is a proof of cordiality to be
esteemed much above the mere wagging of each other’s hands.

“In the matter of guidance,” I replied, “this person is ready to sit
unreservedly on your well-polished feet. But touching the borrowing of
money, obligations to restore with an added sum after a certain period,
initial-bearing papers of doubtful import, and the like, I have read too
deeply the pointed records of your own printed sheets not to prefer
an existence devoted to the scraping together of dust at the street
corners, rather than a momentary affluence which in the end would betray
me into the tiger-like voracity of a native money-lender.”

“Well, you do me proud, Kong,” said William Beveledge, after regarding
me fixedly for a moment. “If I didn’t remember that you are a
flat-faced, slant-eyed, top-side-under, pig-tailed old heathen, I should
be really annoyed at your unwarrantable personalities. Do you take ME
for what you call a ‘native money-lender’?”

“The pronouncements of destiny are written in iron,” I replied
inoffensively, “and it is as truly said that one fated to end his life
in a cave cannot live for ever on the top of a pagoda. Undoubtedly as
one born and residing here you are native, and as inexorably it succeeds
that if you lend me pieces of gold you become a money-lender. Therefore,
though honourably inspired at the first, you would equally be drawn into
the entanglement of circumstance, and the unevadible end must inevitably
be that against which your printed papers consistently warn one.”

“And what is that?” asked Beveledge Greyson, still regarding me closely,
as though I were a creature of another part.

“At first,” I replied, “there would be an alluring snare of graceful
words, tea, and the consuming of paper-rolled herbs, and the matter
would be lightly spoken of as capable of an easy adjustment; which,
indeed, it cannot be denied, is how the detail stands at present. The
next position would be that this person, finding himself unable to
gather together the equivalent of return within the stated time, would
greet you with a very supple neck and pray for a further extension,
which would be permitted on the understanding that in the event of
failure his garments and personal charms should be held in bondage. To
escape so humiliating a necessity, as the time drew near I would address
myself to another, one calling himself William, perchance, and dwelling
in a northern province, to whom I would be compelled to assign my
peach-orchard at Yuen-ping. Then by varying degrees of infamy I would
in turn be driven to visit a certain Bevel of the Middle Lands, a person
Edge carrying on his insatiable traffic on the southern coast, one Grey
elsewhere, and a Mr. Son, of the west, who might make an honourable
profession of lending money without any security whatever, but who in
the end would possess himself of my ancestral tablets, wives, and inlaid
coffin, and probably also obtain a lien upon my services and prosperity
in the Upper Air. Then, when I had parted from all comfort in this
life, and every hope of affluence in the Beyond, it would presently
be disclosed that all these were in reality as one person who had
unceasingly plotted to my destruction, and William Beveledge Greyson
would stand revealed in the guise of a malevolent vampire. Truly that
development has at this moment an appearance of unreality, and worthy
even of pooh-pooh, but thus is the warning spread by your own printed
papers and the records of your Halls of Justice, and it would be an
unseemly presumption for one of my immature experience to ignore the
outstretched and warning finger of authority.”

“Well, Kong,” he said at length, after considering my words attentively,
“I always thought that your mental outlook was a hash of Black Art,
paper lanterns, blank verse, twilight, and delirium tremens, but hang me
if you aren’t sound on finance, and I only wish that you’d get some of
my friends to look at the matter of borrowing in your own reasonable,
broad-minded light. The question is, what next?”

I replied that I leaned heavily against his sagacious insight, adding,
however, that even among a nation of barbarians one who could repeat
the three hundred and eleven poems comprising the Book of Odes from
beginning to end, and claim the degree “Assured Genius” would ever be
certain of a place.

“Yes,” replied William Greyson,--“in the workhouse. Put your degree in
your inside pocket, Kong, and don’t mention it. You’ll have far more
chance as a distressed mariner. The casual wards are full of B.A.’s,
but the navy can’t get enough A.B.’s at any price. What do you say to
an organ, by the way? Mysterious musicians generally go down well, and
I dare say there’s room for a change from veiled ladies, persecuted
captains and indigent earls. You ought to make a sensation.”

“Is it in the nature of melodious sounds upon winding a handle?” I
asked, not at the moment grasping with certainty to what organ he
referred.

“Well, some call them that,” he admitted, “others don’t. I suppose, now,
you wouldn’t care to walk to Brighton with your feet tied together,
or your hair in curl papers, and then get on at a music hall? Or would
there be any chance of your Legation kidnapping you if it was properly
worked? ‘Kong Ho, the great Chinese Reformer, tells the Story of his
Life,’--there ought to be money in it. Are you a reformer or the leader
of a secret society, Kong?”

“On the contrary,” I replied, “we of our Line have ever been unflinching
in our loyalty to the dynasty of Tsing.”

“You ought to have known better, then. It’s a poor business being that
in your country nowadays. Pity there are no bye-elections on the African
Labour Question, or you’d be snapped up for a procession.”

To this I replied that although the idea of moving in a processional
triumph would readily ensnare the minds of the light and fantastic, I
should prefer some more literary occupation, submissively adding that in
such a case I would not stiffen my joints against the most menial lot,
even that of blending my voice in a laudatory chorus, or of carrying
official pronouncements about the walls of the city, for it is said with
justice, “The starving man does not peel his melon, nor do the parched
first wipe round the edges of the proffered cup.”

“If you’ve set your mind on something literary,” said Beveledge
confidently, “you have every chance of finishing up in a chorus or
carrying printed placards about the streets, certainly. When it comes
to that, look me up in Eastcheap.” With this encouraging assurance of
my ultimate success he left me, and rejoicing that I had not fallen into
the snare of opposing a written destiny, I sought the literary quarters
of the city.

When this person has been able to write of any custom or facet of
existence here in a strain of conscientious esteem, he has not hesitated
to dip his brush deeply into the inkpot. Reverting backwards, this
barbarian enactment of not permitting those who from any cause have
decided upon spending the night in a philosophical abstraction to repose
upon the public seats about the swards and open spaces is not conceived
in a mood of affable toleration. Nevertheless there are deserted places
beyond the furthest limits of the city where a more amiable full-face
is shown. On the eleventh day of this one’s determination to sustain
himself by the exercise of his literary style, he was journeying about
sunset towards one of these spots, subduing the grosser instincts of
mankind by reviewing the wisdom of the sublime Lao Ch’un, who decided
that heat and cold, pain and fatigue, and mental distress, have no real
existence, and are therefore amenable to logical disproof, while the
cravings of hunger and thirst are merely the superfluous attributes of
a former and lower state of existence, when a passer-by, who for some
distance had been alternately advancing before and remaining behind,
matched his footsteps into mine.

“Whichee way walk-go, John, eh?” said this unfortunate being, who
appeared to be suffering from a laborious deformity of speech. “Allee
samee load me. Chin-chin.”

Filled with compassion for one who evidently found himself alone in a
strange land, in the absence of his more highly-accomplished companion,
unable to indicate his wants and requirements to those about him, I
regretfully admitted that I had not chanced to encounter that John
whose wandering footsteps he sought; and to indicate, by not leaving him
abruptly, that I maintained a sympathetic concern over his welfare, I
pointed out to him the exceptional brilliance of the approaching night,
adding that I myself was then directing a course towards a certain
spacious Heath, a few li distant in the north.

“Sing-dance tomollow, then?” he said, with a condensed air of general
disappointment. “Chop-chop in a pay look-see show on Ham--Hamstl--oh
damme! on ‘Ampstead ‘Eath? Booked up, eh, John?”

Gradually convinced that it was becoming necessary to readjust the
significance of the incident, I replied that I had no intention of
partaking of chops or food of any variety in an erected tent, but merely
of passing the night in an intellectual seclusion.

“Oh,” said the one who was walking by my side, regarding my garments
with engaging attention, and at the same time appearing to regain an
unruffled speech as though the other had been an assumed device, “I
understand--the Blue Sky Hotel. Well, I’ve stayed there once or twice
myself. A bit down on your uppers, eh?”

“Assuredly this person may perchance lay his upper parts down for a
short space of time,” I admitted, when I had traced out the symbolism of
the words. “As it is humanely written in The Books, ‘Sleep and suicide
are the free refuges equally of the innocent and the guilty.’”

“Oh, come now, don’t,” exclaimed the energetic person, striking himself
together by means of his two hands. “It’s sinful to talk about suicide
the day before bank holiday. Why, my only Somali warrior has vamoosed
with his full make-up, and the Magnetic Girl too, and I never thought of
suicide--only whether to turn my old woman into a Veiled Beauty of the
Harem or a Hairy Lama from Tibet.”

Not absolutely grasping the emergency, yet in a spirit of inoffensive
cordiality I remarked that the alternative was insufferably perplexing,
while he continued.

“Then I spotted you, and in a flash I got an idea that ought to take and
turn out really great if you’ll come in. Now follow this: Missionary’s
tent in the wilds of Pekin. Domestic interior by lamp-light. Missionary
(me) reading evening paper; missionary’s wife (the missus) making tea,
and between times singing to keep the small pet goat quiet (small goat,
a pillow, horsecloth, and pocket-handkerchief). Breaks down singing,
sobs, and says she feels a strange all-over presentiment. Missionary
admits being a bit fluffed himself, and lets out about a notice signed
in blood that he’s seen in the city.”

“Carried upon a pole?” this person demanded, feeling that something of a
literary nature might yet be wrested into the incident.

“On a flagstaff if you like,” conceded the other one magnanimously. “A
notice to the effect that it is the duty of every jack mother’s son of
them to douse the foreign devils, man, woman, and child, and especially
the talk-book pass-hat-round men. Also that he has had several
brick-ends heaved at him on his way back. Then stops suddenly, hits
his upper crust, and says that it’s like his blamed fat-headedness
to frighten her; while she clutches at herself three times and faints
away.”

“Amid the voluminous burning of blue lights?” suggested this person
resourcefully.

“By rights there should be,” admitted the one who was devising the
representation; “but it will hardly run to it. Anyway, it costs nothing
to turn the lamp down--saves a bit in fact, and gives an effect. Then
outside, in the distance at first you understand, you begin to work up
the sound of the advancing mob--rattles, shouts, tum-tums, groans, tin
plates and all that one mortal man can do with hands, feet and mouth.”

“With the interspersal of an occasional cracker and the stirring notes
produced by striking a hollow wooden fish repeatedly?” I cried; for let
it be confessed that amid the portrayal of the scene my imagination had
taken an allotted part.

“If you like to provide them, and don’t set the bally show on fire,” he
replied. “Anyhow, these two aren’t supposed to notice anything even when
the row gets louder. Then it drops and you are heard outside talking in
whispers to the others--words of command and telling them to keep back
half-a-mo, and so on. See?”

“Doubtless introducing a spoken charm and repeating the words of an
incantation against omens, treachery, and other matters.”

“Next a flap of the tent down on the floor is raised, and you
reconnoitre, looking your very worst and holding a knife between your
teeth and another in each hand. Wave a hand to your followers to keep
back--or come on: it makes no difference. Then you crawl in on your
stomach, give a terrific howl, and stab me in the back. That rolls
me under the curtain, and so lets me out. The missus ups with the
wood-chopper and stands before the cradle, while you yell and dance
round with the knives. That ought to be made ‘the moment’ of the whole
piece. The great thing is to make enough noise. If you can yell louder
than the talking-machine outfit on the next pitch we ought to turn money
away. While you are at it I start a fresh row outside--shouts, cheers,
groans, words of command and a paper bag or two. Seeing that the game
is up you make a rush at the old woman; she downs you with the chopper,
turns the lamp up full, shakes out a Union Jack over the sleeping
infant, and finally stands in her finest attitude with one hand pointing
impressively upwards and the other contemptuously downwards just as Rule
Britannia is played on the cornet outside and I appear at the door in a
general’s full uniform and let down the curtain.”

For acting in the manner designated--as touching the noises both inside
and out, the set dance with upraised knives, the casting to earth of
himself, and being myself in turn vanquished by the aged female, with
an added compact that from time to time I should be led by a chain
and shown to the people from a raised platform--we agreed upon a daily
reward of two pieces of silver, an adequacy of food, and a certain
ambiguously-referred-to share of the gain. It need not be denied that
with so favourable an opportunity of introducing passages from the
Classics a much less sum would have been accepted, but having obtained
this without a struggle, the one now recounting the facts raised the
opportune suggestion of an inscribed placard, in order to fulfil the
portent foreshadowed by William Greyson.

“Oh, we’ll star you, never fear,” assented the accommodating personage,
and having by this time reached that spot upon the Heath where his
Domestic Altar had been raised, we entered.

“All the most distinguished actors in this country take another
name,” he said reflectively, when he had drawn forth a parchment of
praiseworthy dimensions and ink of three colours, “and though I have
nothing to say against Kong Ho Tsin Cheng Quank Paik T’chun Li Yuen
Nung for quiet unostentatious dignity, it doesn’t have just the grip
and shudder that we want. Now how does ‘Fang’ strike you?” and upon my
courteous acquiescence that this indeed united within it those qualities
which he required, he traced its characters in red ink upon a lavish
scale.

“‘Fang Hung Sin’ about fits the idea of snap and bloodthirstiness, I
should say,” he continued, and using the brush and all the colours
with an expert proficiency which would infallibly gain him an early
recognition at any of our competitive examinations, he presently laid
before me the following gracefully-composed notice, which was suspended
from a conspicuous pole about the door of the tent on the following day.

 FANG HUNG SIN
 The Captured Boxer Chieftain.

 Under a strong guard, and by arrangement with the British and
 Chinese authorities concerned,

 Fang Hung Sin

 Will positively re-enact the GORY SCENES of CARNAGE in which
 he took a LEADING and SANGUINARY PART during the LATE RISING.

 ALONE IN PEKIN
 Or, What a Woman can do.

 PANEL I. PEACE: The Missionary’s Tent by Night--All’s Well--
 The Dread Warning--“I am by your side, Beloved.”

 PANEL II. ALARM: The Signal--The Spy--The Mob Outside--
 Treachery--“Save Yourself, my Darling”--“And Leave
 You? Never!”

 PANEL III. REVENGE: The Attack--The Blow Falls--Who Can Save
 Her Now?--“Back, Renegade Viper!”--The English Guns
 --“Rule Britannia!”

 FANG HUNG SIN, The Desperado.
 There is only one FANG, and he must be seen.
 FANG! FANG!! FANG!!!

I will not upon this occasion, esteemed one, delay myself with an
account of this barbarian Festival of Lanterns; or, as their language
would convey it, Feast of Cocoa-nuts, beyond admitting that with
the possible exception of an important provincial capital during the
triennial examinations I doubt whether our own unapproachable Empire
could show a more impressively-extended gathering, either in the diverse
and ornamental efflorescence of head garb, in the affectionate display
openly lavished by persons of one sex towards those of the other, or
even one more successful in our own pre-eminent art of producing the
multitudinous harmony of conflicting sounds.

At the appointed hour this person submitted himself to be heavily
shackled, and being led out before the assembled crowd, endeavoured by
a smiling benignity of manner and by reassuring signs of welcome, to
produce a favourable impression upon their sympathies and to allure
them within. This pacific face was undoubtedly successful, however
offensively the ill-conditioned one who stood by was inspired to express
himself behind his teeth, for the space of the tent was very quickly
occupied and the actions of simulation were to begin.

Without doubt it might have been better if this person had first made
himself more fully acquainted with the barbarian manner of acting. The
fact that this imagined play, which even in one of our inferior theatres
would have filled the time pleasantly for two or three months, was to
be compressed into the narrow limits of seven minutes and a half, should
reasonably have warned him that amid the ensuing rapidity of word and
action, most of the leisurely courtesies and all the subtle range of
concealed emotion which embellish our own wood pavement must be ignored.
But it is well and suggestively written, “The person who deliberates
sufficiently before taking every step will spend his life standing
upon one leg.” In the past this one had not found himself to be grossly
inadequate on any arising emergency, and he now drew aside the hanging
drapery and prepared to carry out a preconcerted part with intrepid
self-reliance.

It has already been expressed, that the reason and incentive urging me
to a ready agreement lay in the opportunities by which suitable passages
from the high Classics could be discreetly woven into the fabric of the
plot, and the occupation thereby permeated with an honourable literary
flavour. In accordance with this resolve I blended together many
imperishable sayings of the wisest philosophers to present the cries and
turmoil of the approaching mob, but it was not until I protruded my
head beneath the hanging canopy in the guise of one observing that an
opportunity arose of a really well-sustained effort. In this position I
recited Yung Ki’s stimulating address to his troops when in sight of an
overwhelming foe, and, in spite of the continually back-thrust foot
of the undiscriminating one before me, I successfully accomplished the
seventy-five lines of the poem without a stumble. Then entering fully,
with many deprecatory bows and expressions of self-abasement at taking
part in so seemingly detestable an action, I treacherously, yet with
inoffensive tact, struck the one wearing an all-round collar delicately
upon the back. Not recognising the movement, or being in some other way
obtuse, the person in question instead of sinking to the ground turned
hastily to me in the form of an inquiry, leaving me no other reasonable
course than to display the knife openly to him, and to assure him that
the fatal blow had already been inflicted. Undoubtedly his immoderate
retorts were inept at such a moment, nor was his ensuing strategy of
turning completely round three times, striking himself about the head
and body, and uttering ceremonious curses before he fell devoid of
life--as though the earlier remarks had been part of the ordained
scheme--to any degree convincing, and the cries of disapproval from the
onlookers proved that they also regarded this one as the victim of an
unworthy rebuke.

“Not if the benches were filled at half a guinea a head would I take
on another performance like that,” exclaimed the one with whom I was
associated, when it was over. “Besides the dead loss of lasting three
quarters of an hour it’s tempting providence when the seats are movable.
I suppose it isn’t your fault, Kong, you poor creature, but you haven’t
got no glare and glitter. There’s only one thing for it: you must be the
Rev. Mr. Walker and I’ll take Fang.” He then robed himself in my attire,
guided me among the intricacies of the all-round collar and outer
garments in exchange, hung a slender rope about his back, and after
completing the artifice by a skilful device of massing coloured inks
upon our faces, he commanded me to lead him out by a chain and observe
intelligently how a captive Boxer chief should disport himself.

No sooner had we reached the platform than the one whom I controlled
leapt high into the air, dragged me to the edge of the erection, showed
his teeth towards the assembly and waved his arms menacingly at them;
then turning upon this person, he inflamed his face with passion,
rattled his chain furiously, and uttered such vengeance-laden cries
that, unable to subdue the emotion of fear, I abandoned all pretence,
and dropping the chain, fled to the furthest recess of the tent,
followed by the still threatening Fang.

There is an expression among us, “Cheng-hu was too considerate: he tried
to drive nails with a cucumber.” Cheng-hu would certainly have quickly
found the necessity of a weapon of three-times hardened steel if he had
lived among these barbarians, who are insensible to the higher forms of
politeness, in addition to acting in a contrary and illogical manner
on all occasions. Instead of being repelled and discouraged by Fang’s
outrageous behaviour, they clamoured to be admitted into the tent more
vehemently than before, and so successfully established the venture that
the one to whom I must now allude throughout as Fang signified to me his
covetous intention of reducing the performance by a further two and a
half minutes in order to reap an added profit and to garner all his rice
before the Hoang Ho rose.

As for myself, revered, it would be immature to hold the gauze screen of
prevarication between your all-discerning mind and my own trepidation.
From the moment when I first saw the expression of utterly depraved
malignity and deep-seared hate which he had cunningly engraved upon his
face by means of the coloured inks, I was far from being comfortably
settled within myself. Even the society of the not inelegant being of
the inner chamber, whom it was now my part to console with alluring
words and movements, could not for some time retain my face from a
back-way instinct at every sound; but when the detail was reached that
she sank into my grasp bereft of all energy, and for the first time I
was just succeeding in forgetting the unpropitious surroundings, the
one Fang, who had entered with unseemly stealth, suddenly hurled his
soul-freezing battle-cry upon my ear and leapt forward with uplifted
knife. Perceiving the action from an angle of my eye even as he
propelled himself through the air, I could not restrain an ignoble wail
of despair, and not scrupling to forsake the maiden, I would have taken
refuge beneath a couch had he not seized my outer robe and hurled me
to the ground. From this point to the close of the entertainment
the vigorous person in question did not cease from raising cries and
challenges in an unfaltering and many-fathomed stream, while at the same
time he continued to spring from one extremity of the stage to the other
surrounded by every external attribute of an insatiable tiger-like rage.
It is circumstantially related that the one near at hand, who has been
referred to as possessing a voiced machine, became demented, and bearing
the contrivance to a certain tent erected by the charitable, entreated
them to remove the impediment from its speech so that it might be heard
again and his livelihood restored. When the action of brandishing
a profusion of knives before the lesser one’s eyes was reached, so
nerve-shattering was the impression which Fang created that the back of
the tent had to be removed in order to let out those who no longer had
possession of themselves, and to let in those--to a ten-fold
degree--who strove for admission on the rumour spreading that something
exceptionally repellent was progressing within.

With what attenuated organs of repose this person would have reached
the end of so strenuous an occupation had he been compelled to twelve
enactments each hour throughout the gong-strokes of the day without any
literary relief, it is not enticing to dwell upon. This evil was averted
by a timely intervention, for upon proceeding to the outer air for the
third time I at once perceived among the foremost throng the engaging
full-face of William Beveledge Greyson. This really painstaking
individual had learned, as he afterwards explained, that the chiefs of
exchange (those who in the first case had opposed me resolutely,) had
received a written omen, and now in contrition were expressing their
willingness to hold out a full restitution. With this assurance he
had set forth in an unremitting search, and guided by street-watchers,
removers of superfluous earth, families propelling themselves forward
upon one foot, astrologers, two-wheeled charioteers, and others who move
early and secretly by night, he had traced my description to this same
Heath. Here he had been attracted by the displayed placard (remembering
my honourable boast), and approaching nearer, he had plainly recognised
my voice within. But in spite of this the successful disentanglement was
by no means yet accomplished.

Not expecting so involved a reversal of things, and being short-eyed by
nature, William Greyson did not wait for a fuller assurance than to
be satisfied that the one before him wore my robes and conformed in a
general outline, before he addressed him.

“Kong Ho,” he said pleasantly, “what the Chief Evil Spirit are you doing
up there?” adding persuasively, “Come down, there’s a good fellow. I
have something important to tell you.”

Thus appealed to, the one Fang hesitated in doubt, seeing on the one
hand a certain loss of face if he declined the conversation, and on the
other hand having no clear perception of what was required from him.
Therefore he entered upon a course of evasion and somewhat incapably
replied, “Chow Chop Wei Hai Wei Lung Tung Togo Kuroki Jim Jam Beri
Beri.”

“Don’t act the horned sheep,” said Beveledge, who was both resolute and
one easily set into violent motion by an opposing stream. “Come down,
or I’ll come up and fetch you.” And not being satisfied with Fang’s
ill-advised attempt to express himself equivocally, those around took up
the apt similitude of a self-opinionated animal, and began to suggest a
comparison to other creatures no less degraded.

“Rats yourselves!” exclaimed the easily-inflamed person at my side,
losing the inefficient cords of his prudence beneath the sting. “Who’s
a rabbit? For two guinea-pigs I’d mow all the grass between here and
the Spaniards with your own left ears,” and not permitting me sufficient
preparation to withhold the chain more firmly, he abruptly cast himself
down among them, amid a scene of the most untamed confusion.

“Oh, affectionately-disposed brethren,” I exclaimed, moving forward and
raising my hand in refined disapproval, “the sublime Confucius, in the
twenty-third chapter of the book called ‘The Great Learning,’ warns us
against--” but before I could formulate the allusion Beveledge
Greyson, who at the sound of my conciliatory words had gazed first in
astonishment and then in a self-convulsed position, drew himself up to
my side, and taking a firm grasp upon the all-round collar, projected me
without a pause through the tent, and only halting for a moment to point
significantly back to the varied and animated scene behind, where, amid
a very profuse display of contending passions, the erected stage was
already being dragged to the ground, and a band of the official watch
was in the act of converging from every side, he led me through more
deserted paths to the scene of a final extrication.

With a well-gratified sense of having held an unswerving course along
the convoluted outline of Destiny’s decree, to whatever tending.

KONG HO.




LETTER XIV


 Concerning a pressing invitation from an ever benevolently-
 disposed father to a prosaic but dutifully-inclined son. The
 recording of certain matters of no particular moment.
 Concerning that ultimate end which is symbolic of the
 inexorable wheels of a larger Destiny.


VENERATED SIRE,--It is not for the earthworm to say when and in what
exact position the iron-shod boot shall descend, and this person, being
an even inferior creature for the purpose of the comparison, bows an
acquiescent neck to your very explicit command that he shall return to
Yuen-ping without delay. He cannot put away from his mind a clinging
suspicion that this arising is the result of some imperfection in
his deplorable style of correspondence, whereby you have formed an
impression quite opposed to that which it had been the intention to
convey, and that, perchance, you even have a secret doubt whether upon
some specified occasion he may not have conducted the enterprise to an
ignoble, or at least not markedly successful, end. However, the saying
runs, “The stone-cutter always has the last word,” and you equally, by
intimating with your usual unanswerable and clear-sighted gift of
logic that no further allowance of taels will be sent for this one’s
dispersal, diplomatically impose upon an ever-yearning son the most
feverish anxiety once more to behold your large and open-handed face.

Standing thus poised, as it may be said, for a returning flight across
the elements of separation, it is not inopportune for this person to let
himself dwell gracefully upon those lighter points of recollection which
have engraved themselves from time to time upon his mind without leading
to any more substantial adventure worthy to record. Many of the things
which seemed strange and incomprehensible when he first came among
this powerful though admittedly barbarian people, are now revealed at
a proper angle; others, to which he formerly imagined he had found the
disclosing key, are, on the other hand, plunged into a distorting haze;
while between these lie a multitude of details in every possible stage
of disentanglement and doubt. As a final and painstaking pronouncement,
this person has no hesitation in declaring that this country is
not--as practically all our former travellers have declared--completely
down-side-up as compared with our own manners and customs, but at the
same time it is very materially sideways.

Thus, instead of white, black robes are the indication of mourning; but
as, for the generality, the same colour is also used for occasions of
commerce, ceremony, religion, and the ordinary affairs of life, the
matter remains exactly as it was before. Yet with obtuse inconsistency
the garments usually white--in which a change would be really
noticeable--remain white throughout the most poignant grief. How much
more markedly expressed would be the symbolism if during such a period
they wore white outer robes and black body garments. Nevertheless it
cannot be said that they are unmindful of the emblematic influence of
colour, for, unlike the reasonable conviction that red is red and blue
is blue, which has satisfied our great nation from the days of the
legendary Shun, these pale-eyed foreigners have diverged into countless
trifling imaginings, so that when the one who is now expressing his
contempt for the development required a robe of a certain hue, he had to
bend his mouth, before he could be exactly understood, to the degrading
necessity of asking for “Drowned-rat brown,” “Sunstroke magenta,”
 “Billingsgate purple,” “London milk azure,” “Settling-day green,” or the
like. In the other signs of mourning they do not come within measurable
distance of our pure and uncomfortable standard. “If you are really
sincere in your regret for the one who has Passed Beyond, why do you not
sit upon the floor for seven days and nights, take up all food with your
fingers, and allow your nails to grow untrimmed for three years?” was
a question which I at first instinctively put to lesser ones in their
affliction. In every case save one I received answers of evasive
purport, and even the one stated reason, “Because although I am a poor
widder I ain’t a pig,” I deemed shallow.

I have already dipped a revealing brush into the subject of names.
Were the practice of applying names in a wrong and illogical sequence
maintained throughout it might indeed raise a dignified smile, but
it would not appear contemptible; but what can be urged when upon an
occasion one name appears first, upon another occasion last? A dignity
is conferred in old age, and it is placed before the family designation
borne by an honoured father and a direct line of seventeen revered
ancestors. Another title is bestowed, and eats up the former like a
revengeful dragon. New distinctions follow, some at one end, others at
another, until a very successful person may be suitably compared to
the ringed oleander snake, which has the power of growing equally
from either the head or the tail. To express the matter by a definite
allusion, how much more graceful and orchideous, even in a condensed
fashion, would appear the designation of this selected one, if instead
of the usual form of the country it was habitually set forth in the
following logical and thoroughly Chinese style:--Chamberlain Joseph,
Master, Mr., Thrice Wearer of the Robes and Golden Collar, One of the
Just Peacemakers, Esquire, Member of the House of Law-givers, Leader
in the Council of Commerce, Presider over the Tables of Provincial
Government, Uprightly Honourable Secretary of the Outlying Parts.

Among the notes which at various times I have inscribed in a book
for future guidance I find it written on an early page, “They do not
hesitate to express their fathers’ names openly,” but to this assertion
there stands a warning sign which was added after the following
incident. “Is it true, Mr. Kong,” asked a lesser one, who is spoken of
as vastly rich but discontented with her previous lot, of this person
upon an occasion, “is it really true that your countrymen to not
consider it right to speak of their fathers’ names, even in this
enlightened age?” To this I replied that the matter was as she had
eloquently expressed it, and, encouraged by her amiable condescension,
I asked after the memory of her paternal grandsire, whose name I had
frequently heard whispered in connection with her own. To my inelegant
confusion she regarded me for a period as though I had the virtue of
having become transparent, and then passed on in a most overwhelming
excess of disconcertingly-arranged silence.

“You’ve done it now, Kong,” said one who stood by (or, as we would
express the same thought, “You have succeeded in accomplishing the
undesirable”); “don’t you know that the old man was in the tripe and
trotter line?”

“To no degree,” I replied truly. “Yet,” I continued, matching his idiom
with another equally facile, “wherein was this person’s screw loose? Are
they not openly referred to--those of the Line of Tripe and Trotter--by
their descendants?”

“Not in most cases,” he said, with a concentration that indicated
a lurking sting among his words. “Generally speaking, they aren’t
mentioned or taken into any account whatever. While they are alive they
are kept in the background and invited to treat themselves to the Tower
when nice people are expected; when dead they are fastened up in the
family back cupboard by a score of ten-inch nails and three-trick Yale
locks, so to speak. And in the meantime all the splash is being made on
their muddy oof. See?”

I nodded agreeably, though, had the opportunity been more favourable, I
would have made the feint to learn somewhat more of this secret practice
of burying in the enclosed space beneath the stairs. Thus is it set
forth why, after the statement, “They do not hesitate to express their
fathers’ names openly,” it is further written, “Walk slowly! Engrave
well upon your discreet remembrance the unmentionable Line of Tripe and
Trotter.”

Another point of comparison which the superficial have failed to record
is to be found in the frequent encouragements to regard The Virtues
which are to be seen, like our own Confucian extracts, freely inscribed
on every wall and suitable place about the city. These for the most part
counsel moderation in taking false oaths, in stepping heedlessly upon
the unknown ground, in following paths which lead to doubtful ends, and
other timely warnings. “Beware a smoke-breathing demon,” is frequently
cast across one’s path upon a barrier, and this person has never failed
to accept the omen and to retrace his steps hastily without looking to
the right or the left. Even our own national caution is not forgotten,
although to conform to barbarian indolence it is written, “Slowly,
slowly; drive slowly.” “Keep to the Right” (or, “Abandon that which is
evil,” as the analogy holds,) is perhaps the most frequently displayed
of all, and doubtless many charitable persons obtain an ever-accruing
merit by hanging the sign bearing these words upon every available post.
Others are of a stern and threatening nature, designed to make the most
hardened ill-doer pause, as--in their own tongue--“Rubbish may be shot
here”; which we should render, “At any moment, and in such a place
as this, a just doom and extinction may overtake the worthless.” This
inscription is never to be seen except in waste expanses, where it
points its significance with a multiplied force. There is another
definite threat which is lavishly set out, and so thoroughly that it may
be encountered in the least frequented and almost inaccessible spots.
This, as it may be translated, reads, “Trespass not the forbidden. The
profligate may flourish like the gourd for a season, but in the
end assuredly they will be detected, and justice meted out with the
relentless fury of the written law.”

In a converse position, the wide difference in the ceremonial forms of
retaliatory invective has practically disarmed this usually eloquent
person, and he long since abandoned every hope of expressing himself
with any satisfaction in encounters of however acrimonious a trend.
At first, with an urbane smile and gestures of dignified contempt, he
impugned the authenticity of the Ancestral Tablets of those with whom
he strove, in an unbroken stream of most bitter contumely. Finding them
silent under this reproach, he next lightly traced their origin back
through generations of afflicted lepers, deformed ape-beings, and
Nameless Things, to a race of primitive ghouls, and then went on in
relentless fluency to predict an early return in their descendants to
the condition of a similar state. For some time he had a well-gratified
assurance that those whom he assailed were so overwhelmed as to be
incapable of retort, and in this belief he never failed to call upon
passers-by to witness his triumph; but on the fourth occasion a young
man whom I had thus publicly denounced for a sufficient though forgotten
reason, after listening courteously to my venomous accusations, bestowed
a two-cash piece upon me and passed on, remarking that it was hard,
and those around, also, would have added from their stores had it
been permitted. From this time onward I did not attempt to make myself
disagreeable either in public or to those whom I esteemed privately. On
the other hand, the barbarian manner of retort did not find me endowed
by nature to parry it successfully. Quite lacking in measured periods,
it aims, by an extreme rapidity of thrust and an insincerity of
sequence, to entangle the one who is assailed in a complication of
arising doubts and emotions. “Who are you,--no one but yourself,”
 exclaimed a hireling of hung-dog expression who claimed to have
exchanged pledging gifts with a certain maiden who stood, as it were,
between us, and falling into the snare, I protested warmly against the
insult, and strove to disprove the inference before the paralogism lay
revealed. Throughout the whole range of the Odes, the Histories, the
Analects, and the Rites what recognised formula of rejoinder is there to
the taunt, “Oh, go and put your feet in mustard and cress”; or how
can one, however skilled in the highest Classics, parry the subtle
inconsistencies of the reproach, “You’re a nice bit of orl right, aren’t
you? Not arf, I don’t think.”

Among the arts of this country that of painting upon canvas is held in
repute, but to a person associated with the masterpieces of the Ma epoch
these native attempts would be gravity-dispelling if they were not too
reminiscent of the torture chamber. It is rarely, indeed, that even the
most highly-esteemed picture-makers succeed in depicting every portion
of a human body submitted to their brush, and not infrequently half
of the face is left out. Once, when asked by a paint-applier who was
entitled to append two signs of exceptional distinction behind his name,
to express an opinion upon a finished work, I diffidently called his
attention to the fact that he had forgotten to introduce a certain
exalted one’s left ear. “Not at all, Mr. Kong,” he replied, with an
expression of ill-merited self-satisfaction, “but it is hidden by the
face.” “Yet it exists,” I contended; “why not, therefore, press it to
the front at all hazard, rather than send so great a statesman down
into the annals of posterity as deformed to that extent?” “It certainly
exists,” he admitted, “and one takes that for granted; but in my picture
it cannot be seen.” I bowed complaisantly, content to let so damaging
an admission point its own despair. A moment later I continued, “In the
great Circular Hall of the Palace of Envoys there is a picture of
two camels, foot-tethered, as it fortunately chanced, to iron rings.
Formerly there were a drove of eight--the others being free--so
exquisitely outlined in all their parts that one night, when the door
had been left incautiously open, they stepped down from the wall and
escaped to the woods. How deplorable would have been the plight of these
unfortunate beings, if upon passing into the state of a living existence
they had found that as a result of the limited vision of their creator
they only possessed twelve legs and three whole bodies among them.”

Perchance this tactfully-related story, so applicable to his own
deficiencies, may sink into the imagination of the one for whom it was
inoffensively unfolded. Yet doubt remains. Our own picture-judgers
take up a position at the side of work when they with to examine its
qualities, retiring to an ever-diminishing angle in order to bring out
the more delicate effects, until a very expert and conscientious critic
will not infrequently stand really behind the picture he is considering
before he delivers a final pronouncement. Not until these native artists
are able to regard their crude attempts from the other side of the
canvas can they hope to become equally proficient. To this fatal
shortcoming must be added that of insatiable ambition, which prompts
the young to the portrayal of widely differing subjects. Into the
picture-room of one who might thus be described this person was recently
conducted, to pass an opinion upon a scene in which were depicted
seven men of varying nationalities and appropriately garbed, one of the
opposing sex carrying a lighted torch, an elephant reclining beneath a
fruitful vine, and the President of a Republic. For a period this person
resisted the efforts of those who would have questioned him, withdrawing
their attention to the harmonious lights upon the river mist floating
far below, but presently, being definitely called upon, he replied as
follows: “Mih Ying, who was perhaps the greatest of his time, spent his
whole life in painting green and yellow beetles in the act of concealing
themselves beneath dead maple leaves upon the approach of day. At the
age of seventy-five he burst into tears, and upon being approached for
a cause he exclaimed, ‘Alas, if only this person had resisted the
temptation to be diffuse, and had confined himself to green beetles
alone, he might now, instead of contemplating a misspent career, have
been really great.’ How much less,” I continued, “can a person of
immature moustaches hope to depict two such conflicting objects as a
recumbent elephant and the President of a Republic standing beneath a
banner?”

Upon the temptation to deal critically with the religious instincts of
the islanders this person draws an obliterating brush. As practically
every traveller who has honoured our unattractive land with his
effusive presence has subsequently left it in a printed record that
our ceremonies are grotesque, our priesthood ignorant and depraved,
our monasteries and sacred places spots of plague upon an otherwise
flower-adorned landscape, and our beliefs and sacrifices only worthy to
exist for the purpose of being made into jest-origins by more refined
communities, the omission on this one’s part may appear uncivil and
perhaps even intentionally discourteous. To this, as a burner of
joss-sticks and an irregular person, he can only reply by a deprecatory
waving of both hands and a reassuring smile.

With the two-sided memories of many other details hanging thickly around
his brush, it would not be an achievement to continue to a practically
inexhaustible amount. As of the set days when certain things are
observed, among which fall the first of the fourth month (but that would
disclose another involvement), another when flat cakes are partaken
of without due caution, another when rounder cakes are even more
incautiously consumed, and that most brightly-illuminated of all when it
is permissible to embrace maidens openly, and if discreetly accomplished
with no overhanging fear of ensuing forms of law, beneath the emblem of
a suspended branch, in memory of the wisdom of certain venerable sages
who were doubtless expert in the practice. As of the inconvenient
custom when two persons are walking together that they should arrange
themselves side by side, to the obvious discomfort of others, the
sweeping away of all opportunities for agreeable politeness, and
the utter disregard of the time-honoured example of the sagacious
water-fowl. As of the inconsistency of refusing, even with contempt, to
receive our most intimate form of regard and use this person’s lip-cloth
after a feast, yet the mulish eagerness in that same youth to drink from
a cup previously used by a lesser one. As of the precision (which still
remains a cloud of doubt,) with which creatures so intractable as the
bull are successfully trained to roar aloud at certain gong-strokes of
the day as an agreed signal. As of the streets in movement, the lights
at evening, and the voices of those unseen. As of these and as of other
matters, so multitudinous that they crowd about this person’s mind
like the assembling swallows, circling above the deserted millet
fields before they turn their beaks to the sea, and dropping his brush
(perchance with an acquiescent sigh), he, also, kow-tows submissively
to a blind but appointed destiny, and prepares to seek a passage from an
alien land of sojourning.

With the impetuous craving of an affectionate son to behold a revered
sire, intensified by the fact that he has reached the innermost lining
of his sleeve; with affectionate greetings towards Ning, Hia-Fa, and
T’ian Yen, and an assurance that they have never been really absent from
his thoughts.

KONG HO.


 Ernest Bramah, of whom in his lifetime Who’s Who had so
 little to say, was born in Manchester. At seventeen he chose
 farming as a profession, but after three years of losing
 money gave it up to go into journalism. He started as
 correspondent on a typical provincial paper, then went to
 London as secretary to Jerome K. Jerome, and worked himself
 into the editorial side of Jerome’s magazine, To-day, where
 he got the opportunity of meeting the most important
 literary figures of the day. But he soon left To-day to
 join a new publishing firm, as editor of a publication
 called The Minister; finally, after two years of this, he
 turned to writing as his full-time occupation. He was
 intensely interested in coins and published a book on the
 English regal copper coinage. He is, however, best known as
 the creator of the charming character Kai Lung who appears
 in Kai Lung Unrolls His Mat, Kai Lung’s Golden Hours, The
 Wallet of Kai Lung, Kai Lung Beneath the Mulberry Tree, The
 Mirror of Kong Ho, and The Moon of Much Gladness; he also
 wrote two one-act plays which are often performed at London
 variety theatres, and many stories and articles in leading
 periodicals. He died in 1942.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Kong Ho, by Ernest Bramah

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF KONG HO ***

***** This file should be named 1077-0.txt or 1077-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/7/1077/

Produced by John Bickers

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Irish Fairy Tales, by James Stephens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Irish Fairy Tales

Author: James Stephens

Posting Date: December 31, 2008 [EBook #2892]
Release Date: November, 2001
Last Updated: November 19, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IRISH FAIRY TALES ***




Produced by A. Elizabeth Warren





IRISH FAIRY TALES

By James Stephens


CONTENTS

      THE STORY OF TUAN MAC CAIRILL
      THE BOYHOOD OF FIONN
      THE BIRTH OF BRAN
      OISI’N’S MOTHER
      THE WOOING OF BECFOLA
      THE LITTLE BRAWL AT ALLEN
      THE CARL OF THE DRAB COAT
      THE ENCHANTED CAVE OF CESH CORRAN
      BECUMA OF THE WHITE SKIN
      MONGAN’S FRENZY





THE STORY OF TUAN MAC CAIRILL



CHAPTER I

Finnian, the Abbott of Moville, went southwards and eastwards in great
haste. News had come to him in Donegal that there were yet people in his
own province who believed in gods that he did not approve of, and the
gods that we do not approve of are treated scurvily, even by saintly
men.

He was told of a powerful gentleman who observed neither Saint’s day nor
Sunday.

“A powerful person!” said Finnian.

“All that,” was the reply.

“We shall try this person’s power,” said Finnian.

“He is reputed to be a wise and hardy man,” said his informant.

“We shall test his wisdom and his hardihood.”

“He is,” that gossip whispered--“he is a magician.”

“I will magician him,” cried Finnian angrily. “Where does that man
live?”

He was informed, and he proceeded to that direction without delay.

In no great time he came to the stronghold of the gentleman who followed
ancient ways, and he demanded admittance in order that he might preach
and prove the new God, and exorcise and terrify and banish even the
memory of the old one; for to a god grown old Time is as ruthless as to
a beggarman grown old.

But the Ulster gentleman refused Finnian admittance. He barricaded
his house, he shuttered his windows, and in a gloom of indignation and
protest he continued the practices of ten thousand years, and would
not hearken to Finnian calling at the window or to Time knocking at his
door.

But of those adversaries it was the first he redoubted.

Finnian loomed on him as a portent and a terror; but he had no fear of
Time. Indeed he was the foster-brother of Time, and so disdainful of the
bitter god that he did not even disdain him; he leaped over the scythe,
he dodged under it, and the sole occasions on which Time laughs is when
he chances on Tuan, the son of Cairill, the son of Muredac Red-neck.



CHAPTER II

Now Finnian could not abide that any person should resist both the
Gospel and himself, and he proceeded to force the stronghold by peaceful
but powerful methods. He fasted on the gentleman, and he did so to such
purpose that he was admitted to the house; for to an hospitable heart
the idea that a stranger may expire on your doorstep from sheer famine
cannot be tolerated. The gentleman, however, did not give in without a
struggle: he thought that when Finnian had grown sufficiently hungry he
would lift the siege and take himself off to some place where he might
get food. But he did not know Finnian. The great abbot sat down on a
spot just beyond the door, and composed himself to all that might follow
from his action. He bent his gaze on the ground between his feet,
and entered into a meditation from which he would Only be released by
admission or death.

The first day passed quietly.

Often the gentleman would send a servitor to spy if that deserter of the
gods was still before his door, and each time the servant replied that
he was still there.

“He will be gone in the morning,” said the hopeful master.

On the morrow the state of siege continued, and through that day the
servants were sent many times to observe through spy-holes.

“Go,” he would say, “and find out if the worshipper of new gods has
taken himself away.”

But the servants returned each time with the same information.

“The new druid is still there,” they said.

All through that day no one could leave the stronghold. And the enforced
seclusion wrought on the minds of the servants, while the cessation
of all work banded them together in small groups that whispered and
discussed and disputed. Then these groups would disperse to peep through
the spy-hole at the patient, immobile figure seated before the door,
wrapped in a meditation that was timeless and unconcerned. They
took fright at the spectacle, and once or twice a woman screamed
hysterically, and was bundled away with a companion’s hand clapped on
her mouth, so that the ear of their master should not be affronted.

“He has his own troubles,” they said. “It is a combat of the gods that
is taking place.”

So much for the women; but the men also were uneasy. They prowled up and
down, tramping from the spy-hole to the kitchen, and from the kitchen
to the turreted roof. And from the roof they would look down on the
motionless figure below, and speculate on many things, including
the staunchness of man, the qualities of their master, and even the
possibility that the new gods might be as powerful as the old.
From these peepings and discussions they would return languid and
discouraged.

“If,” said one irritable guard, “if we buzzed a spear at the persistent
stranger, or if one slung at him with a jagged pebble!”

“What!” his master demanded wrathfully, “is a spear to be thrown at
an unarmed stranger? And from this house!” And he soundly cuffed that
indelicate servant.

“Be at peace all of you,” he said, “for hunger has a whip, and he will
drive the stranger away in the night.”

The household retired to wretched beds; but for the master of the house
there was no sleep. He marched his halls all night, going often to
the spy-hole to see if that shadow was still sitting in the shade, and
pacing thence, tormented, preoccupied, refusing even the nose of his
favourite dog as it pressed lovingly into his closed palm.

On the morrow he gave in.

The great door was swung wide, and two of his servants carried Finnian
into the house, for the saint could no longer walk or stand upright by
reason of the hunger and exposure to which he had submitted. But his
frame was tough as the unconquerable spirit that dwelt within it, and
in no long time he was ready for whatever might come of dispute or
anathema.

Being quite re-established he undertook the conversion of the master of
the house, and the siege he laid against that notable intelligence was
long spoken of among those who are interested in such things.

He had beaten the disease of Mugain; he had beaten his own pupil the
great Colm Cille; he beat Tuan also, and just as the latter’s door had
opened to the persistent stranger, so his heart opened, and Finnian
marched there to do the will of God, and his own will.



CHAPTER III

One day they were talking together about the majesty of God and His
love, for although Tuan had now received much instruction on this
subject he yet needed more, and he laid as close a siege on Finnian
as Finnian had before that laid on him. But man works outwardly and
inwardly. After rest he has energy, after energy he needs repose; so,
when we have given instruction for a time, we need instruction, and must
receive it or the spirit faints and wisdom herself grows bitter.

Therefore Finnian said: “Tell me now about yourself, dear heart.”

But Tuan was avid of information about the True God. “No, no,” he
said, “the past has nothing more of interest for me, and I do not wish
anything to come between my soul and its instruction; continue to teach
me, dear friend and saintly father.”

“I will do that,” Finnian replied, “but I must first meditate deeply on
you, and must know you well. Tell me your past, my beloved, for a man is
his past, and is to be known by it.”

But Tuan pleaded: “Let the past be content with itself, for man needs
forgetfulness as well as memory.”

“My son,” said Finnian, “all that has ever been done has been done for
the glory of God, and to confess our good and evil deeds is part of
instruction; for the soul must recall its acts and abide by them, or
renounce them by confession and penitence. Tell me your genealogy first,
and by what descent you occupy these lands and stronghold, and then I
will examine your acts and your conscience.”

Tuan replied obediently: “I am known as Tuan, son of Cairill, son of
Muredac Red-neck, and these are the hereditary lands of my father.”

The saint nodded.

“I am not as well acquainted with Ulster genealogies as I should be, yet
I know something of them. I am by blood a Leinsterman,” he continued.

“Mine is a long pedigree,” Tuan murmured.

Finnian received that information with respect and interest.

“I also,” he said, “have an honourable record.”

His host continued: “I am indeed Tuan, the son of Starn, the son of
Sera, who was brother to Partholon.”

“But,” said Finnian in bewilderment, “there is an error here, for you
have recited two different genealogies.”

“Different genealogies, indeed,” replied Tuan thoughtfully, “but they
are my genealogies.”

“I do not understand this,” Finnian declared roundly.

“I am now known as Tuan mac Cairill,” the other replied, “but in the
days of old I was known as Tuan mac Starn, mac Sera.”

“The brother of Partholon,” the saint gasped.

“That is my pedigree,” Tuan said.

“But,” Finnian objected in bewilderment, “Partholon came to Ireland not
long after the Flood.”

“I came with him,” said Tuan mildly.

The saint pushed his chair back hastily, and sat staring at his host,
and as he stared the blood grew chill in his veins, and his hair crept
along his scalp and stood on end.



CHAPTER IV

But Finnian was not one who remained long in bewilderment. He thought on
the might of God and he became that might, and was tranquil.

He was one who loved God and Ireland, and to the person who could
instruct him in these great themes he gave all the interest of his mind
and the sympathy of his heart.

“It is a wonder you tell me, my beloved,” he said. “And now you must
tell me more.”

“What must I tell?” asked Tuan resignedly.

“Tell me of the beginning of time in Ireland, and of the bearing of
Partholon, the son of Noah’s son.”

“I have almost forgotten him,” said Tuan. “A greatly bearded, greatly
shouldered man he was. A man of sweet deeds and sweet ways.”

“Continue, my love,” said Finnian.

“He came to Ireland in a ship. Twenty-four men and twenty-four women
came with him. But before that time no man had come to Ireland, and in
the western parts of the world no human being lived or moved. As we drew
on Ireland from the sea the country seemed like an unending forest. Far
as the eye could reach, and in whatever direction, there were trees; and
from these there came the unceasing singing of birds. Over all that land
the sun shone warm and beautiful, so that to our sea-weary eyes, our
wind-tormented ears, it seemed as if we were driving on Paradise.

“We landed and we heard the rumble of water going gloomily through the
darkness of the forest. Following the water we came to a glade where
the sun shone and where the earth was warmed, and there Partholon rested
with his twenty-four couples, and made a city and a livelihood.

“There were fish in the rivers of Eire’, there were animals in her
coverts. Wild and shy and monstrous creatures ranged in her plains and
forests. Creatures that one could see through and walk through. Long we
lived in ease, and we saw new animals grow,--the bear, the wolf, the
badger, the deer, and the boar.

“Partholon’s people increased until from twenty-four couples there came
five thousand people, who lived in amity and contentment although they
had no wits.”

“They had no wits!” Finnian commented.

“They had no need of wits,” Tuan said.

“I have heard that the first-born were mindless,” said Finnian.
“Continue your story, my beloved.”

“Then, sudden as a rising wind, between one night and a morning, there
came a sickness that bloated the stomach and purpled the skin, and on
the seventh day all of the race of Partholon were dead, save one man
only.” “There always escapes one man,” said Finnian thoughtfully.

“And I am that man,” his companion affirmed.

Tuan shaded his brow with his hand, and he remembered backwards through
incredible ages to the beginning of the world and the first days of
Eire’. And Finnian, with his blood again running chill and his scalp
crawling uneasily, stared backwards with him.



CHAPTER V

“Tell on, my love,” Finnian murmured

“I was alone,” said Tuan. “I was so alone that my own shadow frightened
me. I was so alone that the sound of a bird in flight, or the creaking
of a dew-drenched bough, whipped me to cover as a rabbit is scared to
his burrow.

“The creatures of the forest scented me and knew I was alone. They stole
with silken pad behind my back and snarled when I faced them; the long,
grey wolves with hanging tongues and staring eyes chased me to my cleft
rock; there was no creature so weak but it might hunt me, there was no
creature so timid but it might outface me. And so I lived for two tens
of years and two years, until I knew all that a beast surmises and had
forgotten all that a man had known.

“I could pad as gently as any; I could run as tirelessly. I could be
invisible and patient as a wild cat crouching among leaves; I could
smell danger in my sleep and leap at it with wakeful claws; I could bark
and growl and clash with my teeth and tear with them.”

“Tell on, my beloved,” said Finnian, “you shall rest in God, dear
heart.”

“At the end of that time,” said Tuan, “Nemed the son of Agnoman came to
Ireland with a fleet of thirty-four barques, and in each barque there
were thirty couples of people.”

“I have heard it,” said Finnian.

“My heart leaped for joy when I saw the great fleet rounding the land,
and I followed them along scarped cliffs, leaping from rock to rock like
a wild goat, while the ships tacked and swung seeking a harbour. There I
stooped to drink at a pool, and I saw myself in the chill water.

“I saw that I was hairy and tufty and bristled as a savage boar; that I
was lean as a stripped bush; that I was greyer than a badger; withered
and wrinkled like an empty sack; naked as a fish; wretched as a starving
crow in winter; and on my fingers and toes there were great curving
claws, so that I looked like nothing that was known, like nothing that
was animal or divine. And I sat by the pool weeping my loneliness and
wildness and my stern old age; and I could do no more than cry and
lament between the earth and the sky, while the beasts that tracked me
listened from behind the trees, or crouched among bushes to stare at me
from their drowsy covert.

“A storm arose, and when I looked again from my tall cliff I saw that
great fleet rolling as in a giant’s hand. At times they were pitched
against the sky and staggered aloft, spinning gustily there like
wind-blown leaves. Then they were hurled from these dizzy tops to the
flat, moaning gulf, to the glassy, inky horror that swirled and whirled
between ten waves. At times a wave leaped howling under a ship, and with
a buffet dashed it into air, and chased it upwards with thunder stroke
on stroke, and followed again, close as a chasing wolf, trying with
hammering on hammering to beat in the wide-wombed bottom and suck out
the frightened lives through one black gape. A wave fell on a ship and
sunk it down with a thrust, stern as though a whole sky had tumbled at
it, and the barque did not cease to go down until it crashed and sank in
the sand at the bottom of the sea.

“The night came, and with it a thousand darknesses fell from the
screeching sky. Not a round-eyed creature of the night might pierce an
inch of that multiplied gloom. Not a creature dared creep or stand. For
a great wind strode the world lashing its league-long whips in cracks
of thunder, and singing to itself, now in a world-wide yell, now in an
ear-dizzying hum and buzz; or with a long snarl and whine it hovered
over the world searching for life to destroy.

“And at times, from the moaning and yelping blackness of the sea, there
came a sound--thin-drawn as from millions of miles away, distinct as
though uttered in the ear like a whisper of confidence--and I knew that
a drowning man was calling on his God as he thrashed and was battered
into silence, and that a blue-lipped woman was calling on her man as her
hair whipped round her brows and she whirled about like a top.

“Around me the trees were dragged from earth with dying groans; they
leaped into the air and flew like birds. Great waves whizzed from the
sea: spinning across the cliffs and hurtling to the earth in monstrous
clots of foam; the very rocks came trundling and sidling and grinding
among the trees; and in that rage, and in that horror of blackness I
fell asleep, or I was beaten into slumber.”



CHAPTER VI

“THERE I dreamed, and I saw myself changing into a stag in dream, and
I felt in dream the beating of a new heart within me, and in dream I
arched my neck and braced my powerful limbs.

“I awoke from the dream, and I was that which I had dreamed.

“I stood a while stamping upon a rock, with my bristling head swung
high, breathing through wide nostrils all the savour of the world. For
I had come marvellously from decrepitude to strength. I had writhed from
the bonds of age and was young again. I smelled the turf and knew for
the first time how sweet that smelled. And like lightning my moving nose
sniffed all things to my heart and separated them into knowledge.

“Long I stood there, ringing my iron hoof on stone, and learning all
things through my nose. Each breeze that came from the right hand or the
left brought me a tale. A wind carried me the tang of wolf, and against
that smell I stared and stamped. And on a wind there came the scent of
my own kind, and at that I belled. Oh, loud and clear and sweet was the
voice of the great stag. With what ease my lovely note went lilting.
With what joy I heard the answering call. With what delight I bounded,
bounded, bounded; light as a bird’s plume, powerful as a storm, untiring
as the sea.

“Here now was ease in ten-yard springings, with a swinging head, with
the rise and fall of a swallow, with the curve and flow and urge of an
otter of the sea. What a tingle dwelt about my heart! What a thrill spun
to the lofty points of my antlers! How the world was new! How the sun
was new! How the wind caressed me!

“With unswerving forehead and steady eye I met all that came. The old,
lone wolf leaped sideways, snarling, and slunk away. The lumbering bear
swung his head of hesitations and thought again; he trotted his small
red eye away with him to a near-by brake. The stags of my race fled from
my rocky forehead, or were pushed back and back until their legs broke
under them and I trampled them to death. I was the beloved, the well
known, the leader of the herds of Ireland.

“And at times I came back from my boundings about Eire’, for the strings
of my heart were drawn to Ulster; and, standing away, my wide nose took
the air, while I knew with joy, with terror, that men were blown on the
wind. A proud head hung to the turf then, and the tears of memory rolled
from a large, bright eye.

“At times I drew near, delicately, standing among thick leaves or
crouched in long grown grasses, and I stared and mourned as I looked on
men. For Nemed and four couples had been saved from that fierce storm,
and I saw them increase and multiply until four thousand couples lived
and laughed and were riotous in the sun, for the people of Nemed had
small minds but great activity. They were savage fighters and hunters.

“But one time I came, drawn by that intolerable anguish of memory, and
all of these people were gone: the place that knew them was silent: in
the land where they had moved there was nothing of them but their bones
that glinted in the sun.

“Old age came on me there. Among these bones weariness crept into my
limbs. My head grew heavy, my eyes dim, my knees jerked and trembled,
and there the wolves dared chase me.

“I went again to the cave that had been my home when I was an old man.

“One day I stole from the cave to snatch a mouthful of grass, for I was
closely besieged by wolves. They made their rush, and I barely escaped
from them. They sat beyond the cave staring at me.

“I knew their tongue. I knew all that they said to each other, and all
that they said to me. But there was yet a thud left in my forehead, a
deadly trample in my hoof. They did not dare come into the cave.

“‘To-morrow,’ they said, ‘we will tear out your throat, and gnaw on your
living haunch’.”



CHAPTER VII

“Then my soul rose to the height of Doom, and I intended all that might
happen to me, and agreed to it.

“‘To-morrow,’ I said, ‘I will go out among ye, and I will die,’ and at
that the wolves howled joyfully, hungrily, impatiently.

“I slept, and I saw myself changing into a boar in dream, and I felt in
dream the beating of a new heart within me, and in dream I stretched my
powerful neck and braced my eager limbs. I awoke from my dream, and I
was that which I had dreamed.

“The night wore away, the darkness lifted, the day came; and from
without the cave the wolves called to me: “‘Come out, O Skinny Stag.
Come out and die.’

“And I, with joyful heart, thrust a black bristle through the hole of
the cave, and when they saw that wriggling snout, those curving tusks,
that red fierce eye, the wolves fled yelping, tumbling over each other,
frantic with terror; and I behind them, a wild cat for leaping, a giant
for strength, a devil for ferocity; a madness and gladness of lusty,
unsparing life; a killer, a champion, a boar who could not be defied.

“I took the lordship of the boars of Ireland.

“Wherever I looked among my tribes I saw love and obedience: whenever
I appeared among the strangers they fled away. And the wolves feared me
then, and the great, grim bear went bounding on heavy paws. I charged
him at the head of my troop and rolled him over and over; but it is not
easy to kill the bear, so deeply is his life packed under that stinking
pelt. He picked himself up and ran, and was knocked down, and ran again
blindly, butting into trees and stones. Not a claw did the big bear
flash, not a tooth did he show, as he ran whimpering like a baby, or
as he stood with my nose rammed against his mouth, snarling up into his
nostrils.

“I challenged all that moved. All creatures but one. For men had again
come to Ireland. Semion, the son of Stariath, with his people, from whom
the men of Domnann and the Fir Bolg and the Galiuin are descended. These
I did not chase, and when they chased me I fled.

“Often I would go, drawn by my memoried heart, to look at them as they
moved among their fields; and I spoke to my mind in bitterness: ‘When
the people of Partholon were gathered in counsel my voice was heard; it
was sweet to all who heard it, and the words I spoke were wise. The eyes
of women brightened and softened when they looked at me. They loved to
hear him when he sang who now wanders in the forest with a tusky herd.’”



CHAPTER VIII

“OLD age again overtook me. Weariness stole into my limbs, and anguish
dozed into my mind. I went to my Ulster cave and dreamed my dream, and I
changed into a hawk.

“I left the ground. The sweet air was my kingdom, and my bright eye
stared on a hundred miles. I soared, I swooped; I hung, motionless as a
living stone, over the abyss; I lived in joy and slept in peace, and had
my fill of the sweetness of life.

“During that time Beothach, the son of Iarbonel the Prophet, came to
Ireland with his people, and there was a great battle between his men
and the children of Semion. Long I hung over that combat, seeing every
spear that hurtled, every stone that whizzed from a sling, every sword
that flashed up and down, and the endless glittering of the shields. And
at the end I saw that the victory was with Iarbonel. And from his people
the Tuatha De’ and the Ande’ came, although their origin is forgotten,
and learned people, because of their excellent wisdom and intelligence,
say that they came from heaven.

“These are the people of Faery. All these are the gods.

“For long, long years I was a hawk. I knew every hill and stream; every
field and glen of Ireland. I knew the shape of cliffs and coasts, and
how all places looked under the sun or moon. And I was still a hawk when
the sons of Mil drove the Tuatha De’ Danann under the ground, and held
Ireland against arms or wizardry; and this was the coming of men and the
beginning of genealogies.

“Then I grew old, and in my Ulster cave close to the sea I dreamed my
dream, and in it I became a salmon. The green tides of ocean rose over
me and my dream, so that I drowned in the sea and did not die, for I
awoke in deep waters, and I was that which I dreamed. I had been a man,
a stag, a boar, a bird, and now I was a fish. In all my changes I had
joy and fulness of life. But in the water joy lay deeper, life pulsed
deeper. For on land or air there is always something excessive and
hindering; as arms that swing at the sides of a man, and which the
mind must remember. The stag has legs to be tucked away for sleep, and
untucked for movement; and the bird has wings that must be folded and
pecked and cared for. But the fish has but one piece from his nose to
his tail. He is complete, single and unencumbered. He turns in one turn,
and goes up and down and round in one sole movement.

“How I flew through the soft element: how I joyed in the country where
there is no harshness: in the element which upholds and gives way; which
caresses and lets go, and will not let you fall. For man may stumble in
a furrow; the stag tumble from a cliff; the hawk, wing-weary and beaten,
with darkness around him and the storm behind, may dash his brains
against a tree. But the home of the salmon is his delight, and the sea
guards all her creatures.”



CHAPTER IX

“I became the king of the salmon, and, with my multitudes, I ranged on
the tides of the world. Green and purple distances were under me: green
and gold the sunlit regions above. In these latitudes I moved through a
world of amber, myself amber and gold; in those others, in a sparkle
of lucent blue, I curved, lit like a living jewel: and in these again,
through dusks of ebony all mazed with silver, I shot and shone, the
wonder of the sea.

“I saw the monsters of the uttermost ocean go heaving by; and the long
lithe brutes that are toothed to their tails: and below, where gloom
dipped down on gloom, vast, livid tangles that coiled and uncoiled, and
lapsed down steeps and hells of the sea where even the salmon could not
go.

“I knew the sea. I knew the secret caves where ocean roars to ocean; the
floods that are icy cold, from which the nose of a salmon leaps back as
at a sting; and the warm streams in which we rocked and dozed and were
carried forward without motion. I swam on the outermost rim of the great
world, where nothing was but the sea and the sky and the salmon; where
even the wind was silent, and the water was clear as clean grey rock.

“And then, far away in the sea, I remembered Ulster, and there came on
me an instant, uncontrollable anguish to be there. I turned, and through
days and nights I swam tirelessly, jubilantly; with terror wakening in
me, too, and a whisper through my being that I must reach Ireland or
die.

“I fought my way to Ulster from the sea.

“Ah, how that end of the journey was hard! A sickness was racking in
every one of my bones, a languor and weariness creeping through my every
fibre and muscle. The waves held me back and held me back; the soft
waters seemed to have grown hard; and it was as though I were urging
through a rock as I strained towards Ulster from the sea.

“So tired I was! I could have loosened my frame and been swept away;
I could have slept and been drifted and wafted away; swinging on
grey-green billows that had turned from the land and were heaving and
mounting and surging to the far blue water.

“Only the unconquerable heart of the salmon could brave that end of
toil. The sound of the rivers of Ireland racing down to the sea came to
me in the last numb effort: the love of Ireland bore me up: the gods of
the rivers trod to me in the white-curled breakers, so that I left
the sea at long, long last; and I lay in sweet water in the curve of a
crannied rock, exhausted, three parts dead, triumphant.”



CHAPTER X

“Delight and strength came to me again, and now I explored all the
inland ways, the great lakes of Ireland, and her swift brown rivers.

“What a joy to lie under an inch of water basking in the sun, or beneath
a shady ledge to watch the small creatures that speed like lightning on
the rippling top. I saw the dragon-flies flash and dart and turn, with
a poise, with a speed that no other winged thing knows: I saw the hawk
hover and stare and swoop: he fell like a falling stone, but he could
not catch the king of the salmon: I saw the cold-eyed cat stretching
along a bough level with the water, eager to hook and lift the creatures
of the river. And I saw men.

“They saw me also. They came to know me and look for me. They lay in
wait at the waterfalls up which I leaped like a silver flash. They held
out nets for me; they hid traps under leaves; they made cords of the
colour of water, of the colour of weeds--but this salmon had a nose that
knew how a weed felt and how a string--they drifted meat on a sightless
string, but I knew of the hook; they thrust spears at me, and threw
lances which they drew back again with a cord. Many a wound I got from
men, many a sorrowful scar.

“Every beast pursued me in the waters and along the banks; the barking,
black-skinned otter came after me in lust and gust and swirl; the wild
cat fished for me; the hawk and the steep-winged, spear-beaked birds
dived down on me, and men crept on me with nets the width of a river,
so that I got no rest. My life became a ceaseless scurry and wound and
escape, a burden and anguish of watchfulness--and then I was caught.”



CHAPTER XI

“THE fisherman of Cairill, the King of Ulster, took me in his net. Ah,
that was a happy man when he saw me! He shouted for joy when he saw the
great salmon in his net.

“I was still in the water as he hauled delicately. I was still in the
water as he pulled me to the bank. My nose touched air and spun from it
as from fire, and I dived with all my might against the bottom of the
net, holding yet to the water, loving it, mad with terror that I must
quit that loveliness. But the net held and I came up.

“‘Be quiet, King of the River,’ said the fisherman, ‘give in to Doom,’
said he.

“I was in air, and it was as though I were in fire. The air pressed on
me like a fiery mountain. It beat on my scales and scorched them. It
rushed down my throat and scalded me. It weighed on me and squeezed me,
so that my eyes felt as though they must burst from my head, my head as
though it would leap from my body, and my body as though it would swell
and expand and fly in a thousand pieces.

“The light blinded me, the heat tormented me, the dry air made me
shrivel and gasp; and, as he lay on the grass, the great salmon whirled
his desperate nose once more to the river, and leaped, leaped, leaped,
even under the mountain of air. He could leap upwards, but not forwards,
and yet he leaped, for in each rise he could see the twinkling waves,
the rippling and curling waters.

“‘Be at ease, O King,’ said the fisherman. ‘Be at rest, my beloved. Let
go the stream. Let the oozy marge be forgotten, and the sandy bed where
the shades dance all in green and gloom, and the brown flood sings
along.’

“And as he carried me to the palace he sang a song of the river, and a
song of Doom, and a song in praise of the King of the Waters.

“When the king’s wife saw me she desired me. I was put over a fire and
roasted, and she ate me. And when time passed she gave birth to me, and
I was her son and the son of Cairill the king. I remember warmth and
darkness and movement and unseen sounds. All that happened I remember,
from the time I was on the gridiron until the time I was born. I forget
nothing of these things.”

“And now,” said Finnian, “you will be born again, for I shall baptize
you into the family of the Living God.” ---- So far the story of Tuan,
the son of Cairill.

No man knows if he died in those distant ages when Finnian was Abbot of
Moville, or if he still keeps his fort in Ulster, watching all things,
and remembering them for the glory of God and the honour of Ireland.




THE BOYHOOD OF FIONN




He was a king, a seer and a poet. He was a lord with a manifold and
great train. He was our magician, our knowledgable one, our soothsayer.
All that he did was sweet with him. And, however ye deem my testimony
of Fionn excessive, and, although ye hold my praising overstrained,
nevertheless, and by the King that is above me, he was three times
better than all I say.--Saint PATRICK.




CHAPTER I

Fionn [pronounce Fewn to rhyme with “tune”] got his first training among
women. There is no wonder in that, for it is the pup’s mother teaches it
to fight, and women know that fighting is a necessary art although men
pretend there are others that are better. These were the women druids,
Bovmall and Lia Luachra. It will be wondered why his own mother did not
train him in the first natural savageries of existence, but she could
not do it. She could not keep him with her for dread of the clann-Morna.
The sons of Morna had been fighting and intriguing for a long time to
oust her husband, Uail, from the captaincy of the Fianna of Ireland,
and they had ousted him at last by killing him. It was the only way
they could get rid of such a man; but it was not an easy way, for what
Fionn’s father did not know in arms could not be taught to him even by
Morna. Still, the hound that can wait will catch a hare at last, and
even Manana’nn sleeps. Fionn’s mother was beautiful, long-haired Muirne:
so she is always referred to. She was the daughter of Teigue, the son of
Nuada from Faery, and her mother was Ethlinn. That is, her brother
was Lugh of the Long Hand himself, and with a god, and such a god, for
brother we may marvel that she could have been in dread of Morna or his
sons, or of any one. But women have strange loves, strange fears, and
these are so bound up with one another that the thing which is presented
to us is not often the thing that is to be seen.

However it may be, when Uall died Muirne got married again to the King
of Kerry. She gave the child to Bovmall and Lia Luachra to rear, and we
may be sure that she gave injunctions with him, and many of them. The
youngster was brought to the woods of Slieve Bloom and was nursed there
in secret.

It is likely the women were fond of him, for other than Fionn there
was no life about them. He would be their life; and their eyes may
have seemed as twin benedictions resting on the small fair head. He was
fair-haired, and it was for his fairness that he was afterwards called
Fionn; but at this period he was known as Deimne. They saw the food they
put into his little frame reproduce itself length-ways and sideways in
tough inches, and in springs and energies that crawled at first, and
then toddled, and then ran. He had birds for playmates, but all the
creatures that live in a wood must have been his comrades. There would
have been for little Fionn long hours of lonely sunshine, when the world
seemed just sunshine and a sky. There would have been hours as long,
when existence passed like a shade among shadows, in the multitudinous
tappings of rain that dripped from leaf to leaf in the wood, and slipped
so to the ground. He would have known little snaky paths, narrow enough
to be filled by his own small feet, or a goat’s; and he would have
wondered where they went, and have marvelled again to find that,
wherever they went, they came at last, through loops and twists of the
branchy wood, to his own door. He may have thought of his own door as
the beginning and end of the world, whence all things went, and whither
all things came.

Perhaps he did not see the lark for a long time, but he would have heard
him, far out of sight in the endless sky, thrilling and thrilling until
the world seemed to have no other sound but that clear sweetness; and
what a world it was to make that sound! Whistles and chirps, coos and
caws and croaks, would have grown familiar to him. And he could at last
have told which brother of the great brotherhood was making the noise
he heard at any moment. The wind too: he would have listened to its
thousand voices as it moved in all seasons and in all moods. Perhaps a
horse would stray into the thick screen about his home, and would look
as solemnly on Fionn as Fionn did on it. Or, coming suddenly on him,
the horse might stare, all a-cock with eyes and ears and nose, one
long-drawn facial extension, ere he turned and bounded away with
manes all over him and hoofs all under him and tails all round him. A
solemn-nosed, stern-eyed cow would amble and stamp in his wood to find a
flyless shadow; or a strayed sheep would poke its gentle muzzle through
leaves.

“A boy,” he might think, as he stared on a staring horse, “a boy cannot
wag his tail to keep the flies off,” and that lack may have saddened
him. He may have thought that a cow can snort and be dignified at
the one moment, and that timidity is comely in a sheep. He would have
scolded the jackdaw, and tried to out-whistle the throstle, and wondered
why his pipe got tired when the blackbird’s didn’t. There would be flies
to be watched, slender atoms in yellow gauze that flew, and filmy specks
that flittered, and sturdy, thick-ribbed brutes that pounced like cats
and bit like dogs and flew like lightning. He may have mourned for the
spider in bad luck who caught that fly. There would be much to see and
remember and compare, and there would be, always, his two guardians. The
flies change from second to second; one cannot tell if this bird is a
visitor or an inhabitant, and a sheep is just sister to a sheep; but the
women were as rooted as the house itself.



CHAPTER II

Were his nurses comely or harsh-looking? Fionn would not know. This was
the one who picked him up when he fell, and that was the one who patted
the bruise. This one said: “Mind you do not tumble in the well!”

And that one: “Mind the little knees among the nettles.”

But he did tumble and record that the only notable thing about a well
is that it is wet. And as for nettles, if they hit him he hit back. He
slashed into them with a stick and brought them low. There was nothing
in wells or nettles, only women dreaded them. One patronised women and
instructed them and comforted them, for they were afraid about one.

They thought that one should not climb a tree!

“Next week,” they said at last, “you may climb this one,” and “next
week” lived at the end of the world!

But the tree that was climbed was not worth while when it had been
climbed twice. There was a bigger one near by. There were trees that no
one could climb, with vast shadow on one side and vaster sunshine on
the other. It took a long time to walk round them, and you could not see
their tops.

It was pleasant to stand on a branch that swayed and sprung, and it was
good to stare at an impenetrable roof of leaves and then climb into it.
How wonderful the loneliness was up there! When he looked down there
was an undulating floor of leaves, green and green and greener to a very
blackness of greeniness; and when he looked up there were leaves
again, green and less green and not green at all, up to a very snow and
blindness of greeniness; and above and below and around there was sway
and motion, the whisper of leaf on leaf, and the eternal silence to
which one listened and at which one tried to look.

When he was six years of age his mother, beautiful, long-haired Muirne,
came to see him. She came secretly, for she feared the sons of Morna,
and she had paced through lonely places in many counties before she
reached the hut in the wood, and the cot where he lay with his fists
shut and sleep gripped in them.

He awakened to be sure. He would have one ear that would catch an
unusual voice, one eye that would open, however sleepy the other one
was. She took him in her arms and kissed him, and she sang a sleepy song
until the small boy slept again.

We may be sure that the eye that could stay open stayed open that night
as long as it could, and that the one ear listened to the sleepy song
until the song got too low to be heard, until it was too tender to be
felt vibrating along those soft arms, until Fionn was asleep again, with
a new picture in his little head and a new notion to ponder on.

The mother of himself! His own mother!

But when he awakened she was gone.

She was going back secretly, in dread of the sons of Morna, slipping
through gloomy woods, keeping away from habitations, getting by desolate
and lonely ways to her lord in Kerry.

Perhaps it was he that was afraid of the sons of Morna, and perhaps she
loved him.



CHAPTER III

THE women druids, his guardians, belonged to his father’s people.
Bovmall was Uail’s sister, and, consequently, Fionn’s aunt. Only such
a blood-tie could have bound them to the clann-Baiscne, for it is not
easy, having moved in the world of court and camp, to go hide with a
baby in a wood; and to live, as they must have lived, in terror.

What stories they would have told the child of the sons of Morna. Of
Morna himself, the huge-shouldered, stern-eyed, violent Connachtman; and
of his sons--young Goll Mor mac Morna in particular, as huge-shouldered
as his father, as fierce in the onset, but merry-eyed when the other
was grim, and bubbling with a laughter that made men forgive even his
butcheries. Of Cona’n Mael mac Morna his brother, gruff as a badger,
bearded like a boar, bald as a crow, and with a tongue that could manage
an insult where another man would not find even a stammer. His boast was
that when he saw an open door he went into it, and when he saw a closed
door he went into it. When he saw a peaceful man he insulted him, and
when he met a man who was not peaceful he insulted him. There was Garra
Duv mac Morna, and savage Art Og, who cared as little for their own
skins as they did for the next man’s, and Garra must have been rough
indeed to have earned in that clan the name of the Rough mac Morna.
There were others: wild Connachtmen all, as untameable, as unaccountable
as their own wonderful countryside.

Fionn would have heard much of them, and it is likely that he practised
on a nettle at taking the head off Goll, and that he hunted a sheep
from cover in the implacable manner he intended later on for Cona’n the
Swearer.

But it is of Uail mac Baiscne he would have heard most. With what a
dilation of spirit the ladies would have told tales of him, Fionn’s
father. How their voices would have become a chant as feat was added
to feat, glory piled on glory. The most famous of men and the most
beautiful; the hardest fighter; the easiest giver; the kingly champion;
the chief of the Fianna na h-Eirinn. Tales of how he had been way-laid
and got free; of how he had been generous and got free; of how he had
been angry and went marching with the speed of an eagle and the direct
onfall of a storm; while in front and at the sides, angled from the prow
of his terrific advance, were fleeing multitudes who did not dare to
wait and scarce had time to run. And of how at last, when the time
came to quell him, nothing less than the whole might of Ireland was
sufficient for that great downfall.

We may be sure that on these adventures Fionn was with his father, going
step for step with the long-striding hero, and heartening him mightily.



CHAPTER IV

He was given good training by the women in running and leaping and
swimming.

One of them would take a thorn switch in her hand, and Fionn would
take a thorn switch in his hand, and each would try to strike the other
running round a tree.

You had to go fast to keep away from the switch behind, and a small boy
feels a switch. Fionn would run his best to get away from that prickly
stinger, but how he would run when it was his turn to deal the strokes!

With reason too, for his nurses had suddenly grown implacable. They
pursued him with a savagery which he could not distinguish from hatred,
and they swished him well whenever they got the chance.

Fionn learned to run. After a while he could buzz around a tree like
a maddened fly, and oh, the joy, when he felt himself drawing from the
switch and gaining from behind on its bearer! How he strained and panted
to catch on that pursuing person and pursue her and get his own switch
into action.

He learned to jump by chasing hares in a bumpy field. Up went the hare
and up went Fionn, and away with the two of them, hopping and popping
across the field. If the hare turned while Fionn was after her it was
switch for Fionn; so that in a while it did not matter to Fionn which
way the hare jumped for he could jump that way too. Long-ways, sideways
or baw-ways, Fionn hopped where the hare hopped, and at last he was the
owner of a hop that any hare would give an ear for.

He was taught to swim, and it may be that his heart sank when he fronted
the lesson. The water was cold. It was deep. One could see the bottom,
leagues below, millions of miles below. A small boy might shiver as he
stared into that wink and blink and twink of brown pebbles and murder.
And these implacable women threw him in!

Perhaps he would not go in at first. He may have smiled at them, and
coaxed, and hung back. It was a leg and an arm gripped then; a swing for
Fionn, and out and away with him; plop and flop for him; down into chill
deep death for him, and up with a splutter; with a sob; with a grasp
at everything that caught nothing; with a wild flurry; with a raging
despair; with a bubble and snort as he was hauled again down, and down,
and down, and found as suddenly that he had been hauled out.

Fionn learned to swim until he could pop into the water like an otter
and slide through it like an eel.

He used to try to chase a fish the way he chased hares in the bumpy
field--but there are terrible spurts in a fish. It may be that a fish
cannot hop, but he gets there in a flash, and he isn’t there in another.
Up or down, sideways or endways, it is all one to a fish. He goes and
is gone. He twists this way and disappears the other way. He is over
you when he ought to be under you, and he is biting your toe when you
thought you were biting his tail.

You cannot catch a fish by swimming, but you can try, and Fionn tried.
He got a grudging commendation from the terrible women when he was able
to slip noiselessly in the tide, swim under water to where a wild duck
was floating and grip it by the leg.

“Qu--,” said the duck, and he disappeared before he had time to get the
“-ack” out of him.

So the time went, and Fionn grew long and straight and tough like a
sapling; limber as a willow, and with the flirt and spring of a young
bird. One of the ladies may have said, “He is shaping very well, my
dear,” and the other replied, as is the morose privilege of an aunt,
“He will never be as good as his father,” but their hearts must have
overflowed in the night, in the silence, in the darkness, when they
thought of the living swiftness they had fashioned, and that dear fair
head.



CHAPTER V

ONE day his guardians were agitated: they held confabulations at which
Fionn was not permitted to assist. A man who passed by in the morning
had spoken to them. They fed the man, and during his feeding Fionn had
been shooed from the door as if he were a chicken. When the stranger
took his road the women went with him a short distance. As they passed
the man lifted a hand and bent a knee to Fionn.

“My soul to you, young master,” he said, and as he said it, Fionn
knew that he could have the man’s soul, or his boots, or his feet, or
anything that belonged to him.

When the women returned they were mysterious and whispery. They chased
Fionn into the house, and when they got him in they chased him out
again. They chased each other around the house for another whisper. They
calculated things by the shape of clouds, by lengths of shadows, by the
flight of birds, by two flies racing on a flat stone, by throwing bones
over their left shoulders, and by every kind of trick and game and
chance that you could put a mind to.

They told Fionn he must sleep in a tree that night, and they put him
under bonds not to sing or whistle or cough or sneeze until the morning.

Fionn did sneeze. He never sneezed so much in his life. He sat up in his
tree and nearly sneezed himself out of it. Flies got up his nose, two
at a time, one up each nose, and his head nearly fell off the way he
sneezed.

“You are doing that on purpose,” said a savage whisper from the foot of
the tree.

But Fionn was not doing it on purpose. He tucked himself into a fork the
way he had been taught, and he passed the crawliest, tickliest night he
had ever known. After a while he did not want to sneeze, he wanted to
scream: and in particular he wanted to come down from the tree. But he
did not scream, nor did he leave the tree. His word was passed, and he
stayed in his tree as silent as a mouse and as watchful, until he fell
out of it.

In the morning a band of travelling poets were passing, and the
women handed Fionn over to them. This time they could not prevent him
overhearing.

“The sons of Morna!” they said.

And Fionn’s heart might have swelled with rage, but that it was already
swollen with adventure. And also the expected was happening. Behind
every hour of their day and every moment of their lives lay the sons of
Morna. Fionn had run after them as deer: he jumped after them as hares:
he dived after them as fish. They lived in the house with him: they
sat at the table and ate his meat. One dreamed of them, and they were
expected in the morning as the sun is. They knew only too well that the
son of Uail was living, and they knew that their own sons would know
no ease while that son lived; for they believed in those days that like
breeds like, and that the son of Uail would be Uail with additions.

His guardians knew that their hiding-place must at last be discovered,
and that, when it was found, the sons of Morna would come. They had
no doubt of that, and every action of their lives was based on that
certainty. For no secret can remain secret. Some broken soldier tramping
home to his people will find it out; a herd seeking his strayed cattle
or a band of travelling musicians will get the wind of it. How many
people will move through even the remotest wood in a year! The crows
will tell a secret if no one else does; and under a bush, behind a clump
of bracken, what eyes may there not be! But if your secret is legged
like a young goat! If it is tongued like a wolf! One can hide a baby,
but you cannot hide a boy. He will rove unless you tie him to a post,
and he will whistle then.

The sons of Morna came, but there were only two grim women living in a
lonely hut to greet them. We may be sure they were well greeted. One can
imagine Goll’s merry stare taking in all that could be seen; Cona’n’s
grim eye raking the women’s faces while his tongue raked them again; the
Rough mac Morna shouldering here and there in the house and about it,
with maybe a hatchet in his hand, and Art Og coursing further afield and
vowing that if the cub was there he would find him.



CHAPTER VI

But Fionn was gone. He was away, bound with his band of poets for the
Galtees.

It is likely they were junior poets come to the end of a year’s
training, and returning to their own province to see again the people at
home, and to be wondered at and exclaimed at as they exhibited bits of
the knowledge which they had brought from the great schools. They would
know tags of rhyme and tricks about learning which Fionn would hear of;
and now and again, as they rested in a glade or by the brink of a river,
they might try their lessons over. They might even refer to the ogham
wands on which the first words of their tasks and the opening lines of
poems were cut; and it is likely that, being new to these things, they
would talk of them to a youngster, and, thinking that his wits could be
no better than their own, they might have explained to him how ogham was
written. But it is far more likely that his women guardians had already
started him at those lessons.

Still this band of young bards would have been of infinite interest to
Fionn, not on account of what they had learned, but because of what they
knew. All the things that he should have known as by nature: the look,
the movement, the feeling of crowds; the shouldering and intercourse of
man with man; the clustering of houses and how people bore themselves
in and about them; the movement of armed men, and the homecoming look
of wounds; tales of births, and marriages and deaths; the chase with its
multitudes of men and dogs; all the noise, the dust, the excitement of
mere living. These, to Fionn, new come from leaves and shadows and the
dipple and dapple of a wood, would have seemed wonderful; and the tales
they would have told of their masters, their looks, fads, severities,
sillinesses, would have been wonderful also.

That band should have chattered like a rookery.

They must have been young, for one time a Leinsterman came on them, a
great robber named Fiacuil mac Cona, and he killed the poets. He chopped
them up and chopped them down. He did not leave one poeteen of them
all. He put them out of the world and out of life, so that they stopped
being, and no one could tell where they went or what had really happened
to them; and it is a wonder indeed that one can do that to anything let
alone a band. If they were not youngsters, the bold Fiacuil could not
have managed them all. Or, perhaps, he too had a band, although the
record does not say so; but kill them he did, and they died that way.

Fionn saw that deed, and his blood may have been cold enough as he
watched the great robber coursing the poets as a wild dog rages in a
flock. And when his turn came, when they were all dead, and the grim,
red-handed man trod at him, Fionn may have shivered, but he would have
shown his teeth and laid roundly on the monster with his hands. Perhaps
he did that, and perhaps for that he was spared.

“Who are you?” roared the staring black-mouth with the red tongue
squirming in it like a frisky fish.

“The son of Uail, son of Baiscne,” quoth hardy Fionn. And at that the
robber ceased to be a robber, the murderer disappeared, the black-rimmed
chasm packed with red fish and precipices changed to something else, and
the round eyes that had been popping out of their sockets and trying
to bite, changed also. There remained a laughing and crying and loving
servant who wanted to tie himself into knots if that would please the
son of his great captain. Fionn went home on the robber’s shoulder, and
the robber gave great snorts and made great jumps and behaved like a
first-rate horse. For this same Fiacuil was the husband of Bovmall,
Fionn’s aunt. He had taken to the wilds when clann-Baiscne was broken,
and he was at war with a world that had dared to kill his Chief.



CHAPTER VII

A new life for Fionn in the robber’s den that was hidden in a vast cold
marsh.

A tricky place that would be, with sudden exits and even suddener
entrances, and with damp, winding, spidery places to hoard treasure in,
or to hide oneself in.

If the robber was a solitary he would, for lack of someone else,
have talked greatly to Fionn. He would have shown his weapons and
demonstrated how he used them, and with what slash he chipped his
victim, and with what slice he chopped him. He would have told why a
slash was enough for this man and why that man should be sliced. All men
are masters when one is young, and Fionn would have found knowledge here
also. He would have seen Fiacuil’s great spear that had thirty rivets
of Arabian gold in its socket, and that had to be kept wrapped up and
tied down so that it would not kill people out of mere spitefulness. It
had come from Faery, out of the Shi’ of Aillen mac Midna, and it would
be brought back again later on between the same man’s shoulder-blades.

What tales that man could tell a boy, and what questions a boy could ask
him. He would have known a thousand tricks, and because our instinct is
to teach, and because no man can keep a trick from a boy, he would show
them to Fionn.

There was the marsh too; a whole new life to be learned; a complicated,
mysterious, dank, slippery, reedy, treacherous life, but with its own
beauty and an allurement that could grow on one, so that you could
forget the solid world and love only that which quaked and gurgled.

In this place you may swim. By this sign and this you will know if it is
safe to do so, said Fiacuil mac Cona; but in this place, with this sign
on it and that, you must not venture a toe.

But where Fionn would venture his toes his ears would follow.

There are coiling weeds down there, the robber counselled him; there are
thin, tough, snaky binders that will trip you and grip you, that will
pull you and will not let you go again until you are drowned; until
you are swaying and swinging away below, with outstretched arms, with
outstretched legs, with a face all stares and smiles and jockeyings,
gripped in those leathery arms, until there is no more to be gripped of
you even by them.

“Watch these and this and that,” Fionn would have been told, “and always
swim with a knife in your teeth.”

He lived there until his guardians found out where he was and came after
him. Fiacuil gave him up to them, and he was brought home again to
the woods of Slieve Bloom, but he had gathered great knowledge and new
supplenesses.

The sons of Morna left him alone for a long time. Having made their
essay they grew careless.

“Let him be,” they said. “He will come to us when the time comes.”

But it is likely too that they had had their own means of getting
information about him. How he shaped? what muscles he had? and did
he spring clean from the mark or had he to get off with a push? Fionn
stayed with his guardians and hunted for them. He could run a deer down
and haul it home by the reluctant skull. “Come on, Goll,” he would say
to his stag, or, lifting it over a tussock with a tough grip on the
snout, “Are you coming, bald Cona’n, or shall I kick you in the neck?”

The time must have been nigh when he would think of taking the world
itself by the nose, to haul it over tussocks and drag it into his
pen; for he was of the breed in whom mastery is born, and who are good
masters.

But reports of his prowess were getting abroad. Clann-Morna began to
stretch itself uneasily, and, one day, his guardians sent him on his
travels.

“It is best for you to leave us now,” they said to the tall stripling,
“for the sons of Morna are watching again to kill you.”

The woods at that may have seemed haunted. A stone might sling at one
from a tree-top; but from which tree of a thousand trees did it come? An
arrow buzzing by one’s ear would slide into the ground and quiver there
silently, menacingly, hinting of the brothers it had left in the quiver
behind; to the right? to the left? how many brothers? in how many
quivers...? Fionn was a woodsman, but he had only two eyes to look with,
one set of feet to carry him in one sole direction. But when he was
looking to the front what, or how many whats, could be staring at him
from the back? He might face in this direction, away from, or towards a
smile on a hidden face and a finger on a string. A lance might slide at
him from this bush or from the one yonder.. In the night he might have
fought them; his ears against theirs; his noiseless feet against their
lurking ones; his knowledge of the wood against their legion: but during
the day he had no chance.

Fionn went to seek his fortune, to match himself against all that might
happen, and to carve a name for himself that will live while Time has an
ear and knows an Irishman.



CHAPTER VIII

Fionn went away, and now he was alone. But he was as fitted for
loneliness as the crane is that haunts the solitudes and bleak wastes
of the sea; for the man with a thought has a comrade, and Fionn’s mind
worked as featly as his body did. To be alone was no trouble to him who,
however surrounded, was to be lonely his life long; for this will be
said of Fionn when all is said, that all that came to him went from him,
and that happiness was never his companion for more than a moment.

But he was not now looking for loneliness. He was seeking the
instruction of a crowd, and therefore when he met a crowd he went into
it. His eyes were skilled to observe in the moving dusk and dapple of
green woods. They were trained to pick out of shadows birds that were
themselves dun-coloured shades, and to see among trees the animals that
are coloured like the bark of trees. The hare crouching in the fronds
was visible to him, and the fish that swayed in-visibly in the sway and
flicker of a green bank. He would see all that was to be seen, and he
would see all that is passed by the eye that is half blind from use and
wont.

At Moy Life’ he came on lads swimming in a pool; and, as he looked
on them sporting in the flush tide, he thought that the tricks they
performed were not hard for him, and that he could have shown them new
ones.

Boys must know what another boy can do, and they will match themselves
against everything. They did their best under these observing eyes, and
it was not long until he was invited to compete with them and show his
mettle. Such an invitation is a challenge; it is almost, among boys, a
declaration of war. But Fionn was so far beyond them in swimming that
even the word master did not apply to that superiority.

While he was swimming one remarked: “He is fair and well shaped,” and
thereafter he was called “Fionn” or the Fair One. His name came from
boys, and will, perhaps, be preserved by them.

He stayed with these lads for some time, and it may be that they
idolised him at first, for it is the way with boys to be astounded and
enraptured by feats; but in the end, and that was inevitable, they grew
jealous of the stranger. Those who had been the champions before he came
would marshal each other, and, by social pressure, would muster all the
others against him; so that in the end not a friendly eye was turned on
Fionn in that assembly. For not only did he beat them at swimming, he
beat their best at running and jumping, and when the sport degenerated
into violence, as it was bound to, the roughness of Fionn would be ten
times as rough as the roughness of the roughest rough they could put
forward. Bravery is pride when one is young, and Fionn was proud.

There must have been anger in his mind as he went away leaving that lake
behind him, and those snarling and scowling boys, but there would have
been disappointment also, for his desire at this time should have been
towards friendliness.

He went thence to Lock Le’in and took service with the King of
Finntraigh. That kingdom may have been thus called from Fionn himself
and would have been known by another name when he arrived there.

He hunted for the King of Finntraigh, and it soon grew evident that
there was no hunter in his service to equal Fionn. More, there was no
hunter of them all who even distantly approached him in excellence. The
others ran after deer, using the speed of their legs, the noses of their
dogs and a thousand well-worn tricks to bring them within reach, and,
often enough, the animal escaped them. But the deer that Fionn got the
track of did not get away, and it seemed even that the animals sought
him so many did he catch.

The king marvelled at the stories that were told of this new hunter, but
as kings are greater than other people so they are more curious; and,
being on the plane of excellence, they must see all that is excellently
told of.

The king wished to see him, and Fionn must have wondered what the king
thought as that gracious lord looked on him. Whatever was thought, what
the king said was as direct in utterance as it was in observation.

“If Uail the son of Baiscne has a son,” said the king, “you would surely
be that son.”

We are not told if the King of Finntraigh said anything more, but we
know that Fionn left his service soon afterwards.

He went southwards and was next in the employment of the King of Kerry,
the same lord who had married his own mother. In that service he came to
such consideration that we hear of him as playing a match of chess with
the king, and by this game we know that he was still a boy in his mind
however mightily his limbs were spreading. Able as he was in sports and
huntings, he was yet too young to be politic, but he remained impolitic
to the end of his days, for whatever he was able to do he would do, no
matter who was offended thereat; and whatever he was not able to do he
would do also. That was Fionn.

Once, as they rested on a chase, a debate arose among the Fianna-Finn as
to what was the finest music in the world.

“Tell us that,” said Fionn turning to Oisi’n [pronounced Usheen]

“The cuckoo calling from the tree that is highest in the hedge,” cried
his merry son.

“A good sound,” said Fionn. “And you, Oscar,” he asked, “what is to your
mind the finest of music?”

“The top of music is the ring of a spear on a shield,” cried the stout
lad.

“It is a good sound,” said Fionn. And the other champions told their
delight; the belling of a stag across water, the baying of a tuneful
pack heard in the distance, the song of a lark, the laugh of a gleeful
girl, or the whisper of a moved one.

“They are good sounds all,” said Fionn.

“Tell us, chief,” one ventured, “what you think?”

“The music of what happens,” said great Fionn, “that is the finest music
in the world.”

He loved “what happened,” and would not evade it by the swerve of
a hair; so on this occasion what was occurring he would have occur,
although a king was his rival and his master. It may be that his mother
was watching the match and that he could not but exhibit his skill
before her. He committed the enormity of winning seven games in
succession from the king himself!!!

It is seldom indeed that a subject can beat a king at chess, and this
monarch was properly amazed.

“Who are you at all?” he cried, starting back from the chessboard and
staring on Fionn.

“I am the son of a countryman of the Luigne of Tara,” said Fionn.

He may have blushed as he said it, for the king, possibly for the first
time, was really looking at him, and was looking back through twenty
years of time as he did so. The observation of a king is faultless--it
is proved a thousand times over in the tales, and this king’s equipment
was as royal as the next.

“You are no such son,” said the indignant monarch, “but you are the son
that Muirne my wife bore to Uall mac Balscne.”

And at that Fionn had no more to say; but his eyes may have flown to his
mother and stayed there.

“You cannot remain here,” his step-father continued. “I do not want you
killed under my protection,” he explained, or complained.

Perhaps it was on Fionn’s account he dreaded the sons of Morna, but no
one knows what Fionn thought of him for he never thereafter spoke of his
step-father. As for Muirne she must have loved her lord; or she may have
been terrified in truth of the sons of Morna and for Fionn; but it is so
also, that if a woman loves her second husband she can dislike all that
reminds her of the first one. Fionn went on his travels again.



CHAPTER IX

All desires save one are fleeting, but that one lasts for ever. Fionn,
with all desires, had the lasting one, for he would go anywhere and
forsake anything for wisdom; and it was in search of this that he went
to the place where Finegas lived on a bank of the Boyne Water. But
for dread of the clann-Morna he did not go as Fionn. He called himself
Deimne on that journey.

We get wise by asking questions, and even if these are not answered we
get wise, for a well-packed question carries its answer on its back as
a snail carries its shell. Fionn asked every question he could think of,
and his master, who was a poet, and so an honourable man, answered them
all, not to the limit of his patience, for it was limitless, but to the
limit of his ability.

“Why do you live on the bank of a river?” was one of these questions.
“Because a poem is a revelation, and it is by the brink of running water
that poetry is revealed to the mind.”

“How long have you been here?” was the next query. “Seven years,” the
poet answered.

“It is a long time,” said wondering Fionn.

“I would wait twice as long for a poem,” said the inveterate bard.

“Have you caught good poems?” Fionn asked him.

“The poems I am fit for,” said the mild master. “No person can get more
than that, for a man’s readiness is his limit.”

“Would you have got as good poems by the Shannon or the Suir or by sweet
Ana Life’?”

“They are good rivers,” was the answer. “They all belong to good gods.”

“But why did you choose this river out of all the rivers?”

Finegas beamed on his pupil.

“I would tell you anything,” said he, “and I will tell you that.”

Fionn sat at the kindly man’s feet, his hands absent among tall grasses,
and listening with all his ears. “A prophecy was made to me,” Finegas
began. “A man of knowledge foretold that I should catch the Salmon of
Knowledge in the Boyne Water.”

“And then?” said Fionn eagerly.

“Then I would have All Knowledge.”

“And after that?” the boy insisted.

“What should there be after that?” the poet retorted.

“I mean, what would you do with All Knowledge?”

“A weighty question,” said Finegas smilingly. “I could answer it if I
had All Knowledge, but not until then. What would you do, my dear?”

“I would make a poem,” Fionn cried.

“I think too,” said the poet, “that that is what would be done.”

In return for instruction Fionn had taken over the service of his
master’s hut, and as he went about the household duties, drawing the
water, lighting the fire, and carrying rushes for the floor and the
beds, he thought over all the poet had taught him, and his mind dwelt on
the rules of metre, the cunningness of words, and the need for a clean,
brave mind. But in his thousand thoughts he yet remembered the Salmon of
Knowledge as eagerly as his master did. He already venerated Finegas
for his great learning, his poetic skill, for an hundred reasons; but,
looking on him as the ordained eater of the Salmon of Knowledge, he
venerated him to the edge of measure. Indeed, he loved as well as
venerated this master because of his unfailing kindness, his patience,
his readiness to teach, and his skill in teaching.

“I have learned much from you, dear master,” said Fionn gratefully.

“All that I have is yours if you can take it,” the poet answered, “for
you are entitled to all that you can take, but to no more than that.
Take, so, with both hands.”

“You may catch the salmon while I am with you,” the hopeful boy mused.
“Would not that be a great happening!” and he stared in ecstasy across
the grass at those visions which a boy’s mind knows.

“Let us pray for that,” said Finegas fervently.

“Here is a question,” Fionn continued. “How does this salmon get wisdom
into his flesh?”

“There is a hazel bush overhanging a secret pool in a secret place. The
Nuts of Knowledge drop from the Sacred Bush into the pool, and as they
float, a salmon takes them in his mouth and eats them.”

“It would be almost as easy,” the boy submitted, “if one were to set on
the track of the Sacred Hazel and eat the nuts straight from the bush.”

“That would not be very easy,” said the poet, “and yet it is not as easy
as that, for the bush can only be found by its own knowledge, and that
knowledge can only be got by eating the nuts, and the nuts can only be
got by eating the salmon.”

“We must wait for the salmon,” said Fionn in a rage of resignation.



CHAPTER X

Life continued for him in a round of timeless time, wherein days and
nights were uneventful and were yet filled with interest. As the day
packed its load of strength into his frame, so it added its store of
knowledge to his mind, and each night sealed the twain, for it is in the
night that we make secure what we have gathered in the day.

If he had told of these days he would have told of a succession of meals
and sleeps, and of an endless conversation, from which his mind would
now and again slip away to a solitude of its own, where, in large hazy
atmospheres, it swung and drifted and reposed. Then he would be back
again, and it was a pleasure for him to catch up on the thought that was
forward and re-create for it all the matter he had missed. But he could
not often make these sleepy sallies; his master was too experienced a
teacher to allow any such bright-faced, eager-eyed abstractions, and as
the druid women had switched his legs around a tree, so Finegas chased
his mind, demanding sense in his questions and understanding in his
replies.

To ask questions can become the laziest and wobbliest occupation of a
mind, but when you must yourself answer the problem that you have posed,
you will meditate your question with care and frame it with precision.
Fionn’s mind learned to jump in a bumpier field than that in which he
had chased rabbits. And when he had asked his question, and given his
own answer to it, Finegas would take the matter up and make clear to him
where the query was badly formed or at what point the answer had begun
to go astray, so that Fionn came to understand by what successions a
good question grows at last to a good answer.

One day, not long after the conversation told of, Finegas came to the
place where Fionn was. The poet had a shallow osier basket on his arm,
and on his face there was a look that was at once triumphant and gloomy.
He was excited certainly, but he was sad also, and as he stood gazing on
Fionn his eyes were so kind that the boy was touched, and they were yet
so melancholy that it almost made Fionn weep. “What is it, my master?”
 said the alarmed boy.

The poet placed his osier basket on the grass.

“Look in the basket, dear son,” he said. Fionn looked.

“There is a salmon in the basket.”

“It is The Salmon,” said Finegas with a great sigh. Fionn leaped for
delight.

“I am glad for you, master,” he cried. “Indeed I am glad for you.”

“And I am glad, my dear soul,” the master rejoined.

But, having said it, he bent his brow to his hand and for a long time he
was silent and gathered into himself.

“What should be done now?” Fionn demanded, as he stared on the beautiful
fish.

Finegas rose from where he sat by the osier basket.

“I will be back in a short time,” he said heavily. “While I am away you
may roast the salmon, so that it will be ready against my return.”

“I will roast it indeed,” said Fionn.

The poet gazed long and earnestly on him.

“You will not eat any of my salmon while I am away?” he asked.

“I will not eat the littlest piece,” said Fionn.

“I am sure you will not,” the other murmured, as he turned and walked
slowly across the grass and behind the sheltering bushes on the ridge.

Fionn cooked the salmon. It was beautiful and tempting and savoury as
it smoked on a wooden platter among cool green leaves; and it looked all
these to Finegas when he came from behind the fringing bushes and sat
in the grass outside his door. He gazed on the fish with more than his
eyes. He looked on it with his heart, with his soul in his eyes, and
when he turned to look on Fionn the boy did not know whether the love
that was in his eyes was for the fish or for himself. Yet he did know
that a great moment had arrived for the poet.

“So,” said Finegas, “you did not eat it on me after all?” “Did I not
promise?” Fionn replied.

“And yet,” his master continued, “I went away so that you might eat the
fish if you felt you had to.”

“Why should I want another man’s fish?” said proud Fionn.

“Because young people have strong desires. I thought you might have
tasted it, and then you would have eaten it on me.”

“I did taste it by chance,” Fionn laughed, “for while the fish was
roasting a great blister rose on its skin. I did not like the look of
that blister, and I pressed it down with my thumb. That burned my thumb,
so I popped it in my mouth to heal the smart. If your salmon tastes as
nice as my thumb did,” he laughed, “it will taste very nice.”

“What did you say your name was, dear heart?” the poet asked.

“I said my name was Deimne.”

“Your name is not Deimne,” said the mild man, “your name is Fionn.”

“That is true,” the boy answered, “but I do not know how you know it.”

“Even if I have not eaten the Salmon of Knowledge I have some small
science of my own.”

“It is very clever to know things as you know them,” Fionn replied
wonderingly. “What more do you know of me, dear master?”

“I know that I did not tell you the truth,” said the heavy-hearted man.

“What did you tell me instead of it?”

“I told you a lie.”

“It is not a good thing to do,” Fionn admitted. “What sort of a lie was
the lie, master?” “I told you that the Salmon of Knowledge was to be
caught by me, according to the prophecy.”

“Yes.”

“That was true indeed, and I have caught the fish. But I did not tell
you that the salmon was not to be eaten by me, although that also was in
the prophecy, and that omission was the lie.”

“It is not a great lie,” said Fionn soothingly.

“It must not become a greater one,” the poet replied sternly.

“Who was the fish given to?” his companion wondered.

“It was given to you,” Finegas answered. “It was given to Fionn, the son
of Uail, the son of Baiscne, and it will be given to him.”

“You shall have a half of the fish,” cried Fionn.

“I will not eat a piece of its skin that is as small as the point of its
smallest bone,” said the resolute and trembling bard. “Let you now eat
up the fish, and I shall watch you and give praise to the gods of the
Underworld and of the Elements.”

Fionn then ate the Salmon of Knowledge, and when it had disappeared a
great jollity and tranquillity and exuberance returned to the poet.

“Ah,” said he, “I had a great combat with that fish.”

“Did it fight for its life?” Fionn inquired.

“It did, but that was not the fight I meant.”

“You shall eat a Salmon of Knowledge too,” Fionn assured him.

“You have eaten one,” cried the blithe poet, “and if you make such a
promise it will be because you know.”

“I promise it and know it,” said Fionn, “you shall eat a Salmon of
Knowledge yet.”



CHAPTER XI

He had received all that he could get from Finegas. His education was
finished and the time had come to test it, and to try all else that he
had of mind and body. He bade farewell to the gentle poet, and set out
for Tara of the Kings.

It was Samhain-tide, and the feast of Tara was being held, at which all
that was wise or skilful or well-born in Ireland were gathered together.

This is how Tara was when Tara was. There was the High King’s palace
with its fortification; without it was another fortification enclosing
the four minor palaces, each of which was maintained by one of the four
provincial kings; without that again was the great banqueting hall, and
around it and enclosing all of the sacred hill in its gigantic bound ran
the main outer ramparts of Tara. From it, the centre of Ireland, four
great roads went, north, south, east, and west, and along these roads,
from the top and the bottom and the two sides of Ireland, there moved
for weeks before Samhain an endless stream of passengers.

Here a gay band went carrying rich treasure to decorate the pavilion of
a Munster lord. On another road a vat of seasoned yew, monstrous as a
house on wheels and drawn by an hundred laborious oxen, came bumping and
joggling the ale that thirsty Connaught princes would drink. On a road
again the learned men of Leinster, each with an idea in his head that
would discomfit a northern ollav and make a southern one gape and
fidget, would be marching solemnly, each by a horse that was piled high
on the back and widely at the sides with clean-peeled willow or oaken
wands, that were carved from the top to the bottom with the ogham signs;
the first lines of poems (for it was an offence against wisdom to commit
more than initial lines to writing), the names and dates of kings, the
procession of laws of Tara and of the sub-kingdoms, the names of places
and their meanings. On the brown stallion ambling peacefully yonder
there might go the warring of the gods for two or ten thousand years;
this mare with the dainty pace and the vicious eye might be sidling
under a load of oaken odes in honour of her owner’s family, with a
few bundles of tales of wonder added in case they might be useful; and
perhaps the restive piebald was backing the history of Ireland into a
ditch.

On such a journey all people spoke together, for all were friends, and
no person regarded the weapon in another man’s hand other than as an
implement to poke a reluctant cow with, or to pacify with loud wallops
some hoof-proud colt.

Into this teem and profusion of jolly humanity Fionn slipped, and if his
mood had been as bellicose as a wounded boar he would yet have found
no man to quarrel with, and if his eye had been as sharp as a jealous
husband’s he would have found no eye to meet it with calculation or
menace or fear; for the Peace of Ireland was in being, and for six weeks
man was neighbour to man, and the nation was the guest of the High King.
Fionn went in with the notables.

His arrival had been timed for the opening day and the great feast of
welcome. He may have marvelled, looking on the bright city, with its
pillars of gleaming bronze and the roofs that were painted in many
colours, so that each house seemed to be covered by the spreading wings
of some gigantic and gorgeous bird. And the palaces themselves, mellow
with red oak, polished within and without by the wear and the care of
a thousand years, and carved with the patient skill of unending
generations of the most famous artists of the most artistic country of
the western world, would have given him much to marvel at also. It
must have seemed like a city of dream, a city to catch the heart, when,
coming over the great plain, Fionn saw Tara of the Kings held on its
hill as in a hand to gather all the gold of the falling sun, and to
restore a brightness as mellow and tender as that universal largess.

In the great banqueting hall everything was in order for the feast. The
nobles of Ireland with their winsome consorts, the learned and artistic
professions represented by the pick of their time were in place. The
Ard-Ri, Corm of the Hundred Battles, had taken his place on the raised
dais which commanded the whole of that vast hall. At his Right hand his
son Art, to be afterwards as famous as his famous father, took his seat,
and on his left Goll mor mac Morna, chief of the Fianna of Ireland, had
the seat of honour. As the High King took his place he could see every
person who was noted in the land for any reason. He would know every one
who was present, for the fame of all men is sealed at Tara, and behind
his chair a herald stood to tell anything the king might not know or had
forgotten.

Conn gave the signal and his guests seated themselves.

The time had come for the squires to take their stations behind their
masters and mistresses. But, for the moment, the great room was seated,
and the doors were held to allow a moment of respect to pass before the
servers and squires came in.

Looking over his guests, Conn observed that a young man was yet
standing.

“There is a gentleman,” he murmured, “for whom no seat has been found.”

We may be sure that the Master of the Banquet blushed at that.

“And,” the king continued, “I do not seem to know the young man.”

Nor did his herald, nor did the unfortunate Master, nor did anybody; for
the eyes of all were now turned where the king’s went.

“Give me my horn,” said the gracious monarch.

The horn of state was put to his hand.

“Young gentleman,” he called to the stranger, “I wish to drink to your
health and to welcome you to Tara.”

The young man came forward then, greater-shouldered than any mighty
man of that gathering, longer and cleaner limbed, with his fair curls
dancing about his beardless face. The king put the great horn into his
hand.

“Tell me your name,” he commanded gently.

“I am Fionn, the son of Uail, the son of Baiscne,” said the youth.

And at that saying a touch as of lightning went through the gathering
so that each person quivered, and the son of the great, murdered captain
looked by the king’s shoulder into the twinkling eye of Goll. But no
word was uttered, no movement made except the movement and the utterance
of the Ard-Ri’.

“You are the son of a friend,” said the great-hearted monarch. “You
shall have the seat of a friend.”

He placed Fionn at the right hand of his own son Art.



CHAPTER XII

It is to be known that on the night of the Feast of Samhain the doors
separating this world and the next one are opened, and the inhabitants
of either world can leave their respective spheres and appear in the
world of the other beings.

Now there was a grandson to the Dagda Mor, the Lord of the Underworld,
and he was named Aillen mac Midna, out of Shi’ Finnachy, and this Aillen
bore an implacable enmity to Tara and the Ard-Ri’.

As well as being monarch of Ireland her High King was chief of the
people learned in magic, and it is possible that at some time Conn had
adventured into Tir na n-Og, the Land of the Young, and had done some
deed or misdeed in Aillen’s lordship or in his family. It must have been
an ill deed in truth, for it was in a very rage of revenge that Aillen
came yearly at the permitted time to ravage Tara.

Nine times he had come on this mission of revenge, but it is not to be
supposed that he could actually destroy the holy city: the Ard-Ri’
and magicians could prevent that, but he could yet do a damage so
considerable that it was worth Conn’s while to take special extra
precautions against him, including the precaution of chance.

Therefore, when the feast was over and the banquet had commenced, the
Hundred Fighter stood from his throne and looked over his assembled
people.

The Chain of Silence was shaken by the attendant whose duty and honour
was the Silver Chain, and at that delicate chime the halt went silent,
and a general wonder ensued as to what matter the High King would submit
to his people.

“Friends and heroes,” said Conn, “Aillen, the son of Midna, will come
to-night from Slieve Fuaid with occult, terrible fire against our
city. Is there among you one who loves Tara and the king, and who will
undertake our defence against that being?”

He spoke in silence, and when he had finished he listened to the same
silence, but it was now deep, ominous, agonized. Each man glanced
uneasily on his neighbour and then stared at his wine-cup or his
fingers. The hearts of young men went hot for a gallant moment and were
chilled in the succeeding one, for they had all heard of Aillen out of
Shl Finnachy in the north. The lesser gentlemen looked under their brows
at the greater champions, and these peered furtively at the greatest of
all. Art og mac Morna of the Hard Strokes fell to biting his fingers,
Cona’n the Swearer and Garra mac Morna grumbled irritably to each other
and at their neighbours, even Caelte, the son of Rona’n, looked down
into his own lap, and Goll Mor sipped at his wine without any twinkle
in his eye. A horrid embarrassment came into the great hall, and as the
High King stood in that palpitating silence his noble face changed
from kindly to grave and from that to a terrible sternness. In another
moment, to the undying shame of every person present, he would have been
compelled to lift his own challenge and declare himself the champion of
Tara for that night, but the shame that was on the faces of his people
would remain in the heart of their king. Goll’s merry mind would help
him to forget, but even his heart would be wrung by a memory that he
would not dare to face. It was at that terrible moment that Fionn stood
up.

“What,” said he, “will be given to the man who undertakes this defence?”

“All that can be rightly asked will be royally bestowed,” was the king’s
answer.

“Who are the sureties?” said Fionn.

“The kings of Ireland, and Red Cith with his magicians.”

“I will undertake the defence,” said Fionn. And on that, the kings and
magicians who were present bound themselves to the fulfilment of the
bargain.

Fionn marched from the banqueting hall, and as he went, all who were
present of nobles and retainers and servants acclaimed him and wished
him luck. But in their hearts they were bidding him good-bye, for all
were assured that the lad was marching to a death so unescapeable that
he might already be counted as a dead man.

It is likely that Fionn looked for help to the people of the Shi’
themselves, for, through his mother, he belonged to the tribes of Dana,
although, on the father’s side, his blood was well compounded with
mortal clay. It may be, too, that he knew how events would turn, for he
had eaten the Salmon of Knowledge. Yet it is not recorded that on this
occasion he invoked any magical art as he did on other adventures.

Fionn’s way of discovering whatever was happening and hidden was always
the same and is many times referred to. A shallow, oblong dish of pure,
pale gold was brought to him. This dish was filled with clear water.
Then Fionn would bend his head and stare into the water, and as he
stared he would place his thumb in his mouth under his “Tooth of
Knowledge,” his “wisdom tooth.”

Knowledge, may it be said, is higher than magic and is more to be
sought. It is quite possible to see what is happening and yet not know
what is forward, for while seeing is believing it does not follow that
either seeing or believing is knowing. Many a person can see a thing and
believe a thing and know just as little about it as the person who does
neither. But Fionn would see and know, or he would under-stand a decent
ratio of his visions. That he was versed in magic is true, for he was
ever known as the Knowledgeable man, and later he had two magicians
in his household named Dirim and mac-Reith to do the rough work of
knowledge for their busy master.

It was not from the Shi’, however, that assistance came to Fionn.



CHAPTER XIII

He marched through the successive fortifications until he came to the
outer, great wall, the boundary of the city, and when he had passed this
he was on the wide plain of Tara.

Other than himself no person was abroad, for on the night of the Feast
of Samhain none but a madman would quit the shelter of a house even if
it were on fire; for whatever disasters might be within a house would be
as nothing to the calamities without it.

The noise of the banquet was not now audible to Fionn--it is possible,
however, that there was a shamefaced silence in the great hall--and the
lights of the city were hidden by the successive great ramparts. The sky
was over him; the earth under him; and than these there was nothing, or
there was but the darkness and the wind.

But darkness was not a thing to terrify him, bred in the nightness of
a wood and the very fosterling of gloom; nor could the wind afflict his
ear or his heart. There was no note in its orchestra that he had not
brooded on and become, which becoming is magic. The long-drawn moan of
it; the thrilling whisper and hush; the shrill, sweet whistle, so thin
it can scarcely be heard, and is taken more by the nerves than by the
ear; the screech, sudden as a devil’s yell and loud as ten thunders; the
cry as of one who flies with backward look to the shelter of leaves and
darkness; and the sob as of one stricken with an age-long misery, only
at times remembered, but remembered then with what a pang! His ear
knew by what successions they arrived, and by what stages they grew and
diminished. Listening in the dark to the bundle of noises which make a
noise he could disentangle them and assign a place and a reason to each
gradation of sound that formed the chorus: there was the patter of a
rabbit, and there the scurrying of a hare; a bush rustled yonder,
but that brief rustle was a bird; that pressure was a wolf, and this
hesitation a fox; the scraping yonder was but a rough leaf against bark,
and the scratching beyond it was a ferret’s claw.

Fear cannot be where knowledge is, and Fionn was not fearful.

His mind, quietly busy on all sides, picked up one sound and dwelt on
it. “A man,” said Fionn, and he listened in that direction, back towards
the city.

A man it was, almost as skilled in darkness as Fionn himself “This is no
enemy,” Fionn thought; “his walking is open.”

“Who comes?” he called.

“A friend,” said the newcomer.

“Give a friend’s name,” said Fionn.

“Fiacuil mac Cona,” was the answer.

“Ah, my pulse and heart!” cried Fionn, and he strode a few paces to meet
the great robber who had fostered him among the marshes.

“So you are not afraid,” he said joyfully.

“I am afraid in good truth,” Fiacuil whispered, “and the minute my
business with you is finished I will trot back as quick as legs will
carry me. May the gods protect my going as they protected my coming,”
 said the robber piously.

“Amen,” said Fionn, “and now, tell me what you have come for?”

“Have you any plan against this lord of the Shl?” Fiacuil whispered.

“I will attack him,” said Fionn.

“That is not a plan,” the other groaned, “we do not plan to deliver an
attack but to win a victory.”

“Is this a very terrible person?” Fionn asked.

“Terrible indeed. No one can get near him or away from him. He comes out
of the Shi’ playing sweet, low music on a timpan and a pipe, and all who
hear this music fall asleep.”

“I will not fall asleep,” said Fionn.

“You will indeed, for everybody does.”

“What happens then?” Fionn asked.

“When all are asleep Aillen mac Midna blows a dart of fire out of his
mouth, and everything that is touched by that fire is destroyed, and he
can blow his fire to an incredible distance and to any direction.”

“You are very brave to come to help me,” Fionn murmured, “especially
when you are not able to help me at all.”

“I can help,” Fiacuil replied, “but I must be paid.”

“What payment?”

“A third of all you earn and a seat at your council.”

“I grant that,” said Fionn, “and now, tell me your plan?”

“You remember my spear with the thirty rivets of Arabian gold in its
socket?”

“The one,” Fionn queried, “that had its head wrapped in a blanket and
was stuck in a bucket of water and was chained to a wall as well--the
venomous Birgha?” “That one,” Fiacuil replied.

“It is Aillen mac Midna’s own spear,” he continued, “and it was taken
out of his Shi’ by your father.”

“Well?” said Fionn, wondering nevertheless where Fiacuil got the spear,
but too generous to ask.

“When you hear the great man of the Shi’ coming, take the wrappings off
the head of the spear and bend your face over it; the heat of the spear,
the stench of it, all its pernicious and acrid qualities will prevent
you from going to sleep.”

“Are you sure of that?” said Fionn.

“You couldn’t go to sleep close to that stench; nobody could,” Fiacuil
replied decidedly.

He continued: “Aillen mac Midna will be off his guard when he stops
playing and begins to blow his fire; he will think everybody is asleep;
then you can deliver the attack you were speaking of, and all good luck
go with it.”

“I will give him back his spear,” said Fionn.

“Here it is,” said Fiacuil, taking the Birgha from under his cloak. “But
be as careful of it, my pulse, be as frightened of it as you are of the
man of Dana.”

“I will be frightened of nothing,” said Fionn, “and the only person I
will be sorry for is that Aillen mac Midna, who is going to get his own
spear back.”

“I will go away now,” his companion whispered, “for it is growing darker
where you would have thought there was no more room for darkness, and
there is an eerie feeling abroad which I do not like. That man from the
Shi’ may come any minute, and if I catch one sound of his music I am
done for.”

The robber went away and again Fionn was alone.



CHAPTER XIV

He listened to the retreating footsteps until they could be heard no
more, and the one sound that came to his tense ears was the beating of
his own heart.

Even the wind had ceased, and there seemed to be nothing in the world
but the darkness and himself. In that gigantic blackness, in that unseen
quietude and vacancy, the mind could cease to be personal to itself. It
could be overwhelmed and merged in space, so that consciousness would
be transferred or dissipated, and one might sleep standing; for the mind
fears loneliness more than all else, and will escape to the moon rather
than be driven inwards on its own being.

But Fionn was not lonely, and he was not afraid when the son of Midna
came.

A long stretch of the silent night had gone by, minute following minute
in a slow sequence, wherein as there was no change there was no time;
wherein there was no past and no future, but a stupefying, endless
present which is almost the annihilation of consciousness. A change
came then, for the clouds had also been moving and the moon at last was
sensed behind them--not as a radiance, but as a percolation of light,
a gleam that was strained through matter after matter and was less than
the very wraith or remembrance of itself; a thing seen so narrowly,
so sparsely, that the eye could doubt if it was or was not seeing, and
might conceive that its own memory was re-creating that which was still
absent.

But Fionn’s eye was the eye of a wild creature that spies on darkness
and moves there wittingly. He saw, then, not a thing but a movement;
something that was darker than the darkness it loomed on; not a being
but a presence, and, as it were, impending pressure. And in a little he
heard the deliberate pace of that great being.

Fionn bent to his spear and unloosed its coverings.

Then from the darkness there came another sound; a low, sweet sound;
thrillingly joyous, thrillingly low; so low the ear could scarcely note
it, so sweet the ear wished to catch nothing else and would strive to
hear it rather than all sounds that may be heard by man: the music of
another world! the unearthly, dear melody of the Shi’! So sweet it was
that the sense strained to it, and having reached must follow drowsily
in its wake, and would merge in it, and could not return again to its
own place until that strange harmony was finished and the ear restored
to freedom.

But Fionn had taken the covering from his spear, and with his brow
pressed close to it he kept his mind and all his senses engaged on that
sizzling, murderous point.

The music ceased and Aillen hissed a fierce blue flame from his mouth,
and it was as though he hissed lightning.

Here it would seem that Fionn used magic, for spreading out his fringed
mantle he caught the flame. Rather he stopped it, for it slid from the
mantle and sped down into the earth to the depth of twenty-six spans;
from which that slope is still called the Glen of the Mantle, and the
rise on which Aillen stood is known as the Ard of Fire.

One can imagine the surprise of Aillen mac Midna, seeing his fire caught
and quenched by an invisible hand. And one can imagine that at this
check he might be frightened, for who would be more terrified than a
magician who sees his magic fail, and who, knowing of power, will guess
at powers of which he has no conception and may well dread.

Everything had been done by him as it should be done. His pipe had been
played and his timpan, all who heard that music should be asleep, and
yet his fire was caught in full course and was quenched.

Aillen, with all the terrific strength of which he was master, blew
again, and the great jet of blue flame came roaring and whistling from
him and was caught and disappeared.

Panic swirled into the man from Faery; he turned from that terrible spot
and fled, not knowing what might be behind, but dreading it as he
had never before dreaded anything, and the unknown pursued him; that
terrible defence became offence and hung to his heel as a wolf pads by
the flank of a bull.

And Aillen was not in his own world! He was in the world of men, where
movement is not easy and the very air a burden. In his own sphere, in
his own element, he might have outrun Fionn, but this was Fionn’s world,
Fionn’s element, and the flying god was not gross enough to outstrip
him. Yet what a race he gave, for it was but at the entrance to his
own Shi’ that the pursuer got close enough. Fionn put a finger into
the thong of the great spear, and at that cast night fell on Aillen
mac Midna. His eyes went black, his mind whirled and ceased, there
came nothingness where he had been, and as the Birgha whistled into his
shoulder-blades he withered away, he tumbled emptily and was dead. Fionn
took his lovely head from its shoulders and went back through the night
to Tara.

Triumphant Fionn, who had dealt death to a god, and to whom death would
be dealt, and who is now dead!

He reached the palace at sunrise.

On that morning all were astir early. They wished to see what
destruction had been wrought by the great being, but it was young Fionn
they saw and that redoubtable head swinging by its hair. “What is your
demand?” said the Ard-Ri’. “The thing that it is right I should ask,”
 said Fionn: “the command of the Fianna of Ireland.”

“Make your choice,” said Conn to Goll Mor; “you will leave Ireland, or
you will place your hand in the hand of this champion and be his man.”

Goll could do a thing that would be hard for another person, and he
could do it so beautifully that he was not diminished by any action.

“Here is my hand,” said Goll.

And he twinkled at the stern, young eyes that gazed on him as he made
his submission.




THE BIRTH OF BRAN



CHAPTER I

There are people who do not like dogs a bit--they are usually women--but
in this story there is a man who did not like dogs. In fact, he hated
them. When he saw one he used to go black in the face, and he threw
rocks at it until it got out of sight. But the Power that protects all
creatures had put a squint into this man’s eye, so that he always threw
crooked.

This gentleman’s name was Fergus Fionnliath, and his stronghold was near
the harbour of Galway. Whenever a dog barked he would leap out of his
seat, and he would throw everything that he owned out of the window in
the direction of the bark. He gave prizes to servants who disliked dogs,
and when he heard that a man had drowned a litter of pups he used to
visit that person and try to marry his daughter.

Now Fionn, the son of Uail, was the reverse of Fergus Fionnliath in this
matter, for he delighted in dogs, and he knew everything about them from
the setting of the first little white tooth to the rocking of the last
long yellow one. He knew the affections and antipathies which are proper
in a dog; the degree of obedience to which dogs may be trained without
losing their honourable qualities or becoming servile and suspicious;
he knew the hopes that animate them, the apprehensions which tingle in
their blood, and all that is to be demanded from, or forgiven in, a
paw, an ear, a nose, an eye, or a tooth; and he understood these things
because he loved dogs, for it is by love alone that we understand
anything.

Among the three hundred dogs which Fionn owned there were two to whom
he gave an especial tenderness, and who were his daily and nightly
companions. These two were Bran and Sceo’lan, but if a person were to
guess for twenty years he would not find out why Fionn loved these two
dogs and why he would never be separated from them.

Fionn’s mother, Muirne, went to wide Allen of Leinster to visit her son,
and she brought her young sister Tuiren with her. The mother and aunt
of the great captain were well treated among the Fianna, first, because
they were parents to Fionn, and second, because they were beautiful and
noble women.

No words can describe how delightful Muirne was--she took the branch;
and as to Tuiren, a man could not look at her without becoming angry
or dejected. Her face was fresh as a spring morning; her voice more
cheerful than the cuckoo calling from the branch that is highest in the
hedge; and her form swayed like a reed and flowed like a river, so that
each person thought she would surely flow to him.

Men who had wives of their own grew moody and downcast because they
could not hope to marry her, while the bachelors of the Fianna stared at
each other with truculent, bloodshot eyes, and then they gazed on Tuiren
so gently that she may have imagined she was being beamed on by the mild
eyes of the dawn.

It was to an Ulster gentleman, Iollan Eachtach, that she gave her love,
and this chief stated his rights and qualities and asked for her in
marriage.

Now Fionn did not dislike the man of Ulster, but either he did not
know them well or else he knew them too well, for he made a curious
stipulation before consenting to the marriage. He bound Iollan to return
the lady if there should be occasion to think her unhappy, and Iollan
agreed to do so. The sureties to this bargain were Caelte mac Ronan,
Goll mac Morna, and Lugaidh. Lugaidh himself gave the bride away, but
it was not a pleasant ceremony for him, because he also was in love with
the lady, and he would have preferred keeping her to giving her away.
When she had gone he made a poem about her, beginning:

       “There is no more light in the sky--”

And hundreds of sad people learned the poem by heart.



CHAPTER II

When Iollan and Tuiren were married they went to Ulster, and they lived
together very happily. But the law of life is change; nothing
continues in the same way for any length of time; happiness must become
unhappiness, and will be succeeded again by the joy it had displaced.
The past also must be reckoned with; it is seldom as far behind us as we
could wish: it is more often in front, blocking the way, and the future
trips over it just when we think that the road is clear and joy our own.

Iollan had a past. He was not ashamed of it; he merely thought it
was finished, although in truth it was only beginning, for it is that
perpetual beginning of the past that we call the future.

Before he joined the Fianna he had been in love with a lady of the Shi’,
named Uct Dealv (Fair Breast), and they had been sweethearts for years.
How often he had visited his sweetheart in Faery! With what eagerness
and anticipation he had gone there; the lover’s whistle that he used to
give was known to every person in that Shi’, and he had been discussed
by more than one of the delicate sweet ladies of Faery. “That is your
whistle, Fair Breast,” her sister of the Shi’ would say.

And Uct Dealv would reply: “Yes, that is my mortal, my lover, my pulse,
and my one treasure.”

She laid her spinning aside, or her embroidery if she was at that, or if
she were baking a cake of fine wheaten bread mixed with honey she would
leave the cake to bake itself and fly to Iollan. Then they went hand in
hand in the country that smells of apple-blossom and honey, looking on
heavy-boughed trees and on dancing and beaming clouds. Or they stood
dreaming together, locked in a clasping of arms and eyes, gazing up
and down on each other, Iollan staring down into sweet grey wells that
peeped and flickered under thin brows, and Uct Dealv looking up into
great black ones that went dreamy and went hot in endless alternation.

Then Iollan would go back to the world of men, and Uct Dealv would
return to her occupations in the Land of the Ever Young.

“What did he say?” her sister of the Shi’ would ask.

“He said I was the Berry of the Mountain, the Star of Knowledge, and the
Blossom of the Raspberry.”

“They always say the same thing,” her sister pouted.

“But they look other things,” Uct Dealv insisted. “They feel other
things,” she murmured; and an endless conversation recommenced.

Then for some time Iollan did not come to Faery, and Uct Dealv marvelled
at that, while her sister made an hundred surmises, each one worse than
the last.

“He is not dead or he would be here,” she said. “He has forgotten you,
my darling.”

News was brought to Tlr na n-Og of the marriage of Iollan and Tuiren,
and when Uct Dealv heard that news her heart ceased to beat for a
moment, and she closed her eyes.

“Now!” said her sister of the Shi’. “That is how long the love of a
mortal lasts,” she added, in the voice of sad triumph which is proper to
sisters.

But on Uct Dealv there came a rage of jealousy and despair such as no
person in the Shi’ had ever heard of, and from that moment she
became capable of every ill deed; for there are two things not easily
controlled, and they are hunger and jealousy. She determined that the
woman who had supplanted her in Iollan’s affections should rue the day
she did it. She pondered and brooded revenge in her heart, sitting in
thoughtful solitude and bitter collectedness until at last she had a
plan.

She understood the arts of magic and shape-changing, so she changed
her shape into that of Fionn’s female runner, the best-known woman in
Ireland; then she set out from Faery and appeared in the world. She
travelled in the direction of Iollan’s stronghold.

Iollan knew the appearance of Fionn’s messenger, but he was surprised to
see her.

She saluted him.

“Health and long life, my master.”.

“Health and good days,” he replied. “What brings you here, dear heart?”

“I come from Fionn.”

“And your message?” said he.

“The royal captain intends to visit you.”

“He will be welcome,” said Iollan. “We shall give him an Ulster feast.”

“The world knows what that is,” said the messenger courteously. “And
now,” she continued, “I have messages for your queen.”

Tuiren then walked from the house with the messenger, but when they had
gone a short distance Uct Dealv drew a hazel rod from beneath her cloak
and struck it on the queen’s shoulder, and on the instant Tuiren’s
figure trembled and quivered, and it began to whirl inwards and
downwards, and she changed into the appearance of a hound.

It was sad to see the beautiful, slender dog standing shivering and
astonished, and sad to see the lovely eyes that looked out pitifully
in terror and amazement. But Uct Dealv did not feel sad. She clasped
a chain about the hound’s neck, and they set off westward towards the
house of Fergus Fionnliath, who was reputed to be the unfriendliest man
in the world to a dog. It was because of his reputation that Uct Dealv
was bringing the hound to him. She did not want a good home for this
dog: she wanted the worst home that could be found in the world, and she
thought that Fergus would revenge for her the rage and jealousy which
she felt towards Tuiren.



CHAPTER III

As they paced along Uct Dealv railed bitterly against the hound, and
shook and jerked her chain. Many a sharp cry the hound gave in that
journey, many a mild lament.

“Ah, supplanter! Ah, taker of another girl’s sweetheart!” said Uct Dealv
fiercely. “How would your lover take it if he could see you now? How
would he look if he saw your pointy ears, your long thin snout, your
shivering, skinny legs, and your long grey tail. He would not love you
now, bad girl!”

“Have you heard of Fergus Fionnliath,” she said again, “the man who does
not like dogs?”

Tuiren had indeed heard of him.

“It is to Fergus I shall bring you,” cried Uct Dealv. “He will throw
stones at you. You have never had a stone thrown at you. Ah, bad girl!
You do not know how a stone sounds as it nips the ear with a whirling
buzz, nor how jagged and heavy it feels as it thumps against a skinny
leg. Robber! Mortal! Bad girl! You have never been whipped, but you will
be whipped now. You shall hear the song of a lash as it curls forward
and bites inward and drags backward. You shall dig up old bones
stealthily at night, and chew them against famine. You shall whine and
squeal at the moon, and shiver in the cold, and you will never take
another girl’s sweetheart again.”

And it was in those terms and in that tone that she spoke to Tuiren
as they journeyed forward, so that the hound trembled and shrank, and
whined pitifully and in despair.

They came to Fergus Fionnliath’s stronghold, and Uct Dealv demanded
admittance.

“Leave that dog outside,” said the servant.

“I will not do so,” said the pretended messenger.

“You can come in without the dog, or you can stay out with the dog,”
 said the surly guardian.

“By my hand,” cried Uct Dealv, “I will come in with this dog, or your
master shall answer for it to Fionn.”

At the name of Fionn the servant almost fell out of his standing. He
flew to acquaint his master, and Fergus himself came to the great door
of the stronghold.

“By my faith,” he cried in amazement, “it is a dog.”

“A dog it is,” growled the glum servant.

“Go you away,” said Fergus to Uct Dealv, “and when you have killed the
dog come back to me and I will give you a present.”

“Life and health, my good master, from Fionn, the son of Uail, the son
of Baiscne,” said she to Fergus.

“Life and health back to Fionn,” he replied. “Come into the house and
give your message, but leave the dog outside, for I don’t like dogs.”

“The dog comes in,” the messenger replied.

“How is that?” cried Fergus angrily.

“Fionn sends you this hound to take care of until he comes for her,”
 said the messenger.

“I wonder at that,” Fergus growled, “for Fionn knows well that there is
not a man in the world has less of a liking for dogs than I have.”

“However that may be, master, I have given Fionn’s message, and here at
my heel is the dog. Do you take her or refuse her?”

“If I could refuse anything to Fionn it would be a dog,” said Fergus,
“but I could not refuse anything to Fionn, so give me the hound.”

Uct Dealv put the chain in his hand.

“Ah, bad dog!” said she.

And then she went away well satisfied with her revenge, and returned to
her own people in the Shi.



CHAPTER IV

On the following day Fergus called his servant.

“Has that dog stopped shivering yet?” he asked.

“It has not, sir,” said the servant.

“Bring the beast here,” said his master, “for whoever else is
dissatisfied Fionn must be satisfied.”

The dog was brought, and he examined it with a jaundiced and bitter eye.

“It has the shivers indeed,” he said.

“The shivers it has,” said the servant.

“How do you cure the shivers?” his master demanded, for he thought that
if the animal’s legs dropped off Fionn would not be satisfied.

“There is a way,” said the servant doubtfully.

“If there is a way, tell it to me,” cried his master angrily.

“If you were to take the beast up in your arms and hug it and kiss it,
the shivers would stop,” said the man.

“Do you mean--?” his master thundered, and he stretched his hand for a
club.

“I heard that,” said the servant humbly.

“Take that dog up,” Fergus commanded, “and hug it and kiss it, and if I
find a single shiver left in the beast I’ll break your head.”

The man bent to the hound, but it snapped a piece out of his hand, and
nearly bit his nose off as well.

“That dog doesn’t like me,” said the man.

“Nor do I,” roared Fergus; “get out of my sight.”

The man went away and Fergus was left alone with the hound, but the poor
creature was so terrified that it began to tremble ten times worse than
before.

“Its legs will drop off,” said Fergus. “Fionn will blame me,” he cried
in despair.

He walked to the hound.

“If you snap at my nose, or if you put as much as the start of a tooth
into the beginning of a finger!” he growled.

He picked up the dog, but it did not snap, it only trembled. He held it
gingerly for a few moments.

“If it has to be hugged,” he said, “I’ll hug it. I’d do more than that
for Fionn.”

He tucked and tightened the animal into his breast, and marched moodily
up and down the room. The dog’s nose lay along his breast under his
chin, and as he gave it dutiful hugs, one hug to every five paces, the
dog put out its tongue and licked him timidly under the chin.

“Stop,” roared Fergus, “stop that forever,” and he grew very red in
the face, and stared truculently down along his nose. A soft brown eye
looked up at him and the shy tongue touched again on his chin.

“If it has to be kissed,” said Fergus gloomily, “I’ll kiss it; I’d do
more than that for Fionn,” he groaned.

He bent his head, shut his eyes, and brought the dog’s jaw against his
lips. And at that the dog gave little wriggles in his arms, and little
barks, and little licks, so that he could scarcely hold her. He put the
hound down at last.

“There is not a single shiver left in her,” he said.

And that was true.

Everywhere he walked the dog followed him, giving little prances and
little pats against him, and keeping her eyes fixed on his with such
eagerness and intelligence that he marvelled.

“That dog likes me,” he murmured in amazement.

“By my hand,” he cried next day, “I like that dog.”

The day after that he was calling her “My One Treasure, My Little
Branch.” And within a week he could not bear her to be out of his sight
for an instant.

He was tormented by the idea that some evil person might throw a stone
at the hound, so he assembled his servants and retainers and addressed
them.

He told them that the hound was the Queen of Creatures, the Pulse of his
Heart, and the Apple of his Eye, and he warned them that the person who
as much as looked sideways on her, or knocked one shiver out of her,
would answer for the deed with pains and indignities. He recited a list
of calamities which would befall such a miscreant, and these woes began
with flaying and ended with dismemberment, and had inside bits of such
complicated and ingenious torment that the blood of the men who heard it
ran chill in their veins, and the women of the household fainted where
they stood.



CHAPTER V

In course of time the news came to Fionn that his mother’s sister
was not living with Iollan. He at once sent a messenger calling
for fulfilment of the pledge that had been given to the Fianna, and
demanding the instant return of Tuiren. Iollan was in a sad condition
when this demand was made. He guessed that Uct Dealv had a hand in the
disappearance of his queen, and he begged that time should be given him
in which to find the lost girl. He promised if he could not discover
her within a certain period that he would deliver his body into Fionn’s
hands, and would abide by whatever judgement Fionn might pronounce. The
great captain agreed to that.

“Tell the wife-loser that I will have the girl or I will have his head,”
 said Fionn.

Iollan set out then for Faery. He knew the way, and in no great time he
came to the hill where Uct Dealv was.

It was hard to get Uct Dealv to meet him, but at last she consented, and
they met under the apple boughs of Faery.

“Well!” said Uct Dealv. “Ah! Breaker of Vows and Traitor to Love,” said
she.

“Hail and a blessing,” said Iollan humbly.

“By my hand,” she cried, “I will give you no blessing, for it was no
blessing you left with me when we parted.”

“I am in danger,” said Iollan.

“What is that to me?” she replied fiercely.

“Fionn may claim my head,” he murmured.

“Let him claim what he can take,” said she.

“No,” said Iollan proudly, “he will claim what I can give.”

“Tell me your tale,” said she coldly.

Iollan told his story then, and, he concluded, “I am certain that you
have hidden the girl.”

“If I save your head from Fionn,” the woman of the Shi’ replied, “then
your head will belong to me.”

“That is true,” said Iollan.

“And if your head is mine, the body that goes under it is mine. Do you
agree to that?”

“I do,” said Iollan.

“Give me your pledge,” said Uct Dealv, “that if I save you from this
danger you will keep me as your sweetheart until the end of life and
time.”

“I give that pledge,” said Iollan.

Uct Dealv went then to the house of Fergus Fionnliath, and she broke the
enchantment that was on the hound, so that Tuiren’s own shape came back
to her; but in the matter of two small whelps, to which the hound had
given birth, the enchantment could not be broken, so they had to remain
as they were. These two whelps were Bran and Sceo’lan. They were sent
to Fionn, and he loved them for ever after, for they were loyal and
affectionate, as only dogs can be, and they were as intelligent as human
beings. Besides that, they were Fionn’s own cousins.

Tuiren was then asked in marriage by Lugaidh who had loved her so long.
He had to prove to her that he was not any other woman’s sweetheart,
and when he proved that they were married, and they lived happily ever
after, which is the proper way to live. He wrote a poem beginning:

     “Lovely the day. Dear is the eye of the dawn--”

And a thousand merry people learned it after him.

But as to Fergus Fionnliath, he took to his bed, and he stayed there for
a year and a day suffering from blighted affection, and he would have
died in the bed only that Fionn sent him a special pup, and in a week
that young hound became the Star of Fortune and the very Pulse of his
Heart, so that he got well again, and he also lived happily ever after.




OISIN’S MOTHER


CHAPTER I

EVENING was drawing nigh, and the Fianna-Finn had decided to hunt no
more that day. The hounds were whistled to heel, and a sober, homeward
march began. For men will walk soberly in the evening, however they go
in the day, and dogs will take the mood from their masters. They were
pacing so, through the golden-shafted, tender-coloured eve, when a
fawn leaped suddenly from covert, and, with that leap, all quietness
vanished: the men shouted, the dogs gave tongue, and a furious chase
commenced.

Fionn loved a chase at any hour, and, with Bran and Sceo’lan, he
outstripped the men and dogs of his troop, until nothing remained in the
limpid world but Fionn, the two hounds, and the nimble, beautiful fawn.
These, and the occasional boulders, round which they raced, or over
which they scrambled; the solitary tree which dozed aloof and beautiful
in the path, the occasional clump of trees that hived sweet shadow as
a hive hoards honey, and the rustling grass that stretched to infinity,
and that moved and crept and swung under the breeze in endless, rhythmic
billowings.

In his wildest moment Fionn was thoughtful, and now, although running
hard, he was thoughtful. There was no movement of his beloved hounds
that he did not know; not a twitch or fling of the head, not a cock
of the ears or tail that was not significant to him. But on this chase
whatever signs the dogs gave were not understood by their master.

He had never seen them in such eager flight. They were almost utterly
absorbed in it, but they did not whine with eagerness, nor did they cast
any glance towards him for the encouraging word which he never failed to
give when they sought it.

They did look at him, but it was a look which he could not comprehend.
There was a question and a statement in those deep eyes, and he could
not understand what that question might be, nor what it was they sought
to convey. Now and again one of the dogs turned a head in full flight,
and stared, not at Fionn, but distantly backwards, over the spreading
and swelling plain where their companions of the hunt had disappeared.
“They are looking for the other hounds,” said Fionn.

“And yet they do not give tongue! Tongue it, a Vran!” he shouted, “Bell
it out, a Heo’lan!”

It was then they looked at him, the look which he could not understand
and had never seen on a chase. They did not tongue it, nor bell it, but
they added silence to silence and speed to speed, until the lean grey
bodies were one pucker and lashing of movement.

Fionn marvelled. “They do not want the other dogs to hear or to come on
this chase,” he murmured, and he wondered what might be passing within
those slender heads.

“The fawn runs well,” his thought continued. “What is it, a Vran, my
heart? After her, a Heo’lan! Hist and away, my loves!”

“There is going and to spare in that beast yet,” his mind went on. “She
is not stretched to the full, nor half stretched. She may outrun even
Bran,” he thought ragingly.

They were racing through a smooth valley in a steady, beautiful, speedy
flight when, suddenly, the fawn stopped and lay on the grass, and it lay
with the calm of an animal that has no fear, and the leisure of one that
is not pressed.

“Here is a change,” said Fionn, staring in astonishment.

“She is not winded,” he said. “What is she lying down for?” But Bran and
Sceo’lan did not stop; they added another inch to their long-stretched
easy bodies, and came up on the fawn.

“It is an easy kill,” said Fionn regretfully. “They have her,” he cried.

But he was again astonished, for the dogs did not kill. They leaped and
played about the fawn, licking its face, and rubbing delighted noses
against its neck.

Fionn came up then. His long spear was lowered in his fist at the
thrust, and his sharp knife was in its sheath, but he did not use them,
for the fawn and the two hounds began to play round him, and the fawn
was as affectionate towards him as the hounds were; so that when a
velvet nose was thrust in his palm, it was as often a fawn’s muzzle as a
hound’s.

In that joyous company he came to wide Allen of Leinster, where the
people were surprised to see the hounds and the fawn and the Chief and
none other of the hunters that had set out with them.

When the others reached home, the Chief told of his chase, and it was
agreed that such a fawn must not be killed, but that it should be kept
and well treated, and that it should be the pet fawn of the Fianna.
But some of those who remembered Brah’s parentage thought that as Bran
herself had come from the Shi so this fawn might have come out of the
Shi also.



CHAPTER II

Late that night, when he was preparing for rest, the door of Fionn’s
chamber opened gently and a young woman came into the room. The captain
stared at her, as he well might, for he had never seen or imagined to
see a woman so beautiful as this was. Indeed, she was not a woman, but
a young girl, and her bearing was so gently noble, her look so modestly
high, that the champion dared scarcely look at her, although he could
not by any means have looked away.

As she stood within the doorway, smiling, and shy as a flower,
beautifully timid as a fawn, the Chief communed with his heart.

“She is the Sky-woman of the Dawn,” he said. “She is the light on the
foam. She is white and odorous as an apple-blossom. She smells of spice
and honey. She is my beloved beyond the women of the world. She shall
never be taken from me.”

And that thought was delight and anguish to him: delight because of such
sweet prospect, anguish because it was not yet realised, and might not
be.

As the dogs had looked at him on the chase with a look that he did not
understand, so she looked at him, and in her regard there was a question
that baffled him and a statement which he could not follow.

He spoke to her then, mastering his heart to do it.

“I do not seem to know you,” he said.

“You do not know me indeed,” she replied.

“It is the more wonderful,” he continued gently, “for I should know
every person that is here. What do you require from me?”

“I beg your protection, royal captain.”

“I give that to all,” he answered. “Against whom do you desire
protection?”

“I am in terror of the Fear Doirche.”

“The Dark Man of the Shi?”

“He is my enemy,” she said.

“He is mine now,” said Fionn. “Tell me your story.”

“My name is Saeve, and I am a woman of Faery,” she commenced. “In the
Shi’ many men gave me their love, but I gave my love to no man of my
country.”

“That was not reasonable,” the other chided with a blithe heart.

“I was contented,” she replied, “and what we do not want we do not lack.
But if my love went anywhere it went to a mortal, a man of the men of
Ireland.”

“By my hand,” said Fionn in mortal distress, “I marvel who that man can
be!”

“He is known to you,” she murmured. “I lived thus in the peace of Faery,
hearing often of my mortal champion, for the rumour of his great deeds
had gone through the Shi’, until a day came when the Black Magician
of the Men of God put his eye on me, and, after that day, in whatever
direction I looked I saw his eye.”

She stopped at that, and the terror that was in her heart was on her
face. “He is everywhere,” she whispered. “He is in the bushes, and on
the hill. He looked up at me from the water, and he stared down on
me from the sky. His voice commands out of the spaces, and it demands
secretly in the heart. He is not here or there, he is in all places at
all times. I cannot escape from him,” she said, “and I am afraid,” and
at that she wept noiselessly and stared on Fionn.

“He is my enemy,” Fionn growled. “I name him as my enemy.”

“You will protect me,” she implored.

“Where I am let him not come,” said Fionn. “I also have knowledge. I am
Fionn, the son of Uail, the son of Baiscne, a man among men and a god
where the gods are.”

“He asked me in marriage,” she continued, “but my mind was full of my
own dear hero, and I refused the Dark Man.”

“That was your right, and I swear by my hand that if the man you desire
is alive and unmarried he shall marry you or he will answer to me for
the refusal.”

“He is not married,” said Saeve, “and you have small control over him.”
 The Chief frowned thoughtfully. “Except the High King and the kings I
have authority in this land.”

“What man has authority over himself?” said Saeve.

“Do you mean that I am the man you seek?” said Fionn.

“It is to yourself I gave my love,” she replied. “This is good news,”
 Fionn cried joyfully, “for the moment you came through the door I loved
and desired you, and the thought that you wished for another man went
into my heart like a sword.” Indeed, Fionn loved Saeve as he had not
loved a woman before and would never love one again. He loved her as he
had never loved anything before. He could not bear to be away from her.
When he saw her he did not see the world, and when he saw the world
without her it was as though he saw nothing, or as if he looked on a
prospect that was bleak and depressing. The belling of a stag had been
music to Fionn, but when Saeve spoke that was sound enough for him. He
had loved to hear the cuckoo calling in the spring from the tree that
is highest in the hedge, or the blackbird’s jolly whistle in an autumn
bush, or the thin, sweet enchantment that comes to the mind when a lark
thrills out of sight in the air and the hushed fields listen to the
song. But his wife’s voice was sweeter to Fionn than the singing of a
lark. She filled him with wonder and surmise. There was magic in the
tips of her fingers. Her thin palm ravished him. Her slender foot set
his heart beating; and whatever way her head moved there came a new
shape of beauty to her face.

“She is always new,” said Fionn. “She is always better than any other
woman; she is always better than herself.”

He attended no more to the Fianna. He ceased to hunt. He did not listen
to the songs of poets or the curious sayings of magicians, for all of
these were in his wife, and something that was beyond these was in her
also.

“She is this world and the next one; she is completion,” said Fionn.



CHAPTER III

It happened that the men of Lochlann came on an expedition against
Ireland. A monstrous fleet rounded the bluffs of Ben Edair, and the
Danes landed there, to prepare an attack which would render them masters
of the country. Fionn and the Fianna-Finn marched against them. He did
not like the men of Lochlann at any time, but this time he moved against
them in wrath, for not only were they attacking Ireland, but they had
come between him and the deepest joy his life had known.

It was a hard fight, but a short one. The Lochlannachs were driven back
to their ships, and within a week the only Danes remaining in Ireland
were those that had been buried there.

That finished, he left the victorious Fianna and returned swiftly to the
plain of Allen, for he could not bear to be one unnecessary day parted
from Saeve.

“You are not leaving us!” exclaimed Goll mac Morna.

“I must go,” Fionn replied.

“You will not desert the victory feast,” Conan reproached him.

“Stay with us, Chief,” Caelte begged.

“What is a feast without Fionn?” they complained.

But he would not stay.

“By my hand,” he cried, “I must go. She will be looking for me from the
window.”

“That will happen indeed,” Goll admitted.

“That will happen,” cried Fionn. “And when she sees me far out on the
plain, she will run through the great gate to meet me.”

“It would be the queer wife would neglect that run,” Cona’n growled.

“I shall hold her hand again,” Fionn entrusted to Caelte’s ear.

“You will do that, surely.”

“I shall look into her face,” his lord insisted. But he saw that not
even beloved Caelte understood the meaning of that, and he knew sadly
and yet proudly that what he meant could not be explained by any one and
could not be comprehended by any one.

“You are in love, dear heart,” said Caelte.

“In love he is,” Cona’n grumbled. “A cordial for women, a disease for
men, a state of wretchedness.”

“Wretched in truth,” the Chief murmured. “Love makes us poor We have not
eyes enough to see all that is to be seen, nor hands enough to seize the
tenth of all we want. When I look in her eyes I am tormented because I
am not looking at her lips, and when I see her lips my soul cries out,
‘Look at her eyes, look at her eyes.’”

“That is how it happens,” said Goll rememberingly.

“That way and no other,” Caelte agreed.

And the champions looked backwards in time on these lips and those, and
knew their Chief would go.

When Fionn came in sight of the great keep his blood and his feet
quickened, and now and again he waved a spear in the air.

“She does not see me yet,” he thought mournfully.

“She cannot see me yet,” he amended, reproaching himself.

But his mind was troubled, for he thought also, or he felt without
thinking, that had the positions been changed he would have seen her at
twice the distance.

“She thinks I have been unable to get away from the battle, or that I
was forced to remain for the feast.”

And, without thinking it, he thought that had the positions been changed
he would have known that nothing could retain the one that was absent.

“Women,” he said, “are shamefaced, they do not like to appear eager when
others are observing them.”

But he knew that he would not have known if others were observing him,
and that he would not have cared about it if he had known. And he knew
that his Saeve would not have seen, and would not have cared for any
eyes than his.

He gripped his spear on that reflection, and ran as he had not run in
his life, so that it was a panting, dishevelled man that raced heavily
through the gates of the great Dun.

Within the Dun there was disorder. Servants were shouting to one
another, and women were running to and fro aimlessly, wringing their
hands and screaming; and, when they saw the Champion, those nearest to
him ran away, and there was a general effort on the part of every
person to get behind every other person. But Fionn caught the eye of his
butler, Gariv Crona’n, the Rough Buzzer, and held it.

“Come you here,” he said.

And the Rough Buzzer came to him without a single buzz in his body.

“Where is the Flower of Allen?” his master demanded.

“I do not know, master,” the terrified servant replied.

“You do not know!” said Fionn. “Tell what you do know.”

And the man told him this story.



CHAPTER IV

“When you had been away for a day the guards were surprised. They were
looking from the heights of the Dun, and the Flower of Allen was with
them. She, for she had a quest’s eye, called out that the master of the
Fianna was coming over the ridges to the Dun, and she ran from the keep
to meet you.”

“It was not I,” said Fionn.

“It bore your shape,” replied Gariv Cronan. “It had your armour and your
face, and the dogs, Bran and Sceo’lan, were with it.”

“They were with me,” said Fionn.

“They seemed to be with it,” said the servant humbly

“Tell us this tale,” cried Fionn.

“We were distrustful,” the servant continued. “We had never known Fionn
to return from a combat before it had been fought, and we knew you could
not have reached Ben Edar or encountered the Lochlannachs. So we urged
our lady to let us go out to meet you, but to remain herself in the
Dun.”

“It was good urging,” Fionn assented.

“She would not be advised,” the servant wailed. “She cried to us, ‘Let
me go to meet my love’.”

“Alas!” said Fionn.

“She cried on us, ‘Let me go to meet my husband, the father of the child
that is not born.’”

“Alas!” groaned deep-wounded Fionn. “She ran towards your appearance
that had your arms stretched out to her.”

At that wise Fionn put his hand before his eyes, seeing all that
happened.

“Tell on your tale,” said he.

“She ran to those arms, and when she reached them the figure lifted
its hand. It touched her with a hazel rod, and, while we looked, she
disappeared, and where she had been there was a fawn standing and
shivering. The fawn turned and bounded towards the gate of the Dun, but
the hounds that were by flew after her.”

Fionn stared on him like a lost man.

“They took her by the throat--” the shivering servant whispered.

“Ah!” cried Fionn in a terrible voice.

“And they dragged her back to the figure that seemed to be Fionn. Three
times she broke away and came bounding to us, and three times the dogs
took her by the throat and dragged her back.”

“You stood to look!” the Chief snarled.

“No, master, we ran, but she vanished as we got to her; the great hounds
vanished away, and that being that seemed to be Fionn disappeared with
them. We were left in the rough grass, staring about us and at each
other, and listening to the moan of the wind and the terror of our
hearts.”

“Forgive us, dear master,” the servant cried. But the great captain made
him no answer. He stood as though he were dumb and blind, and now and
again he beat terribly on his breast with his closed fist, as though he
would kill that within him which should be dead and could not die. He
went so, beating on his breast, to his inner room in the Dun, and he was
not seen again for the rest of that day, nor until the sun rose over Moy
Life’ in the morning.



CHAPTER V

For many years after that time, when he was not fighting against the
enemies of Ireland, Fionn was searching and hunting through the length
and breadth of the country in the hope that he might again chance on his
lovely lady from the Shi’. Through all that time he slept in misery each
night and he rose each day to grief. Whenever he hunted he brought only
the hounds that he trusted, Bran and Sceo’lan, Lomaire, Brod, and Lomlu;
for if a fawn was chased each of these five great dogs would know if
that was a fawn to be killed or one to be protected, and so there was
small danger to Saeve and a small hope of finding her.

Once, when seven years had passed in fruitless search, Fionn and the
chief nobles of the Fianna were hunting Ben Gulbain. All the hounds of
the Fianna were out, for Fionn had now given up hope of encountering
the Flower of Allen. As the hunt swept along the sides of the hill there
arose a great outcry of hounds from a narrow place high on the slope
and, over all that uproar there came the savage baying of Fionn’s own
dogs.

“What is this for?” said Fionn, and with his companions he pressed to
the spot whence the noise came.

“They are fighting all the hounds of the Fianna,” cried a champion.

And they were. The five wise hounds were in a circle and were giving
battle to an hundred dogs at once. They were bristling and terrible, and
each bite from those great, keen jaws was woe to the beast that received
it. Nor did they fight in silence as was their custom and training, but
between each onslaught the great heads were uplifted, and they pealed
loudly, mournfully, urgently, for their master.

“They are calling on me,” he roared.

And with that he ran, as he had only once before run, and the men who
were nigh to him went racing as they would not have run for their lives.
They came to the narrow place on the slope of the mountain, and they saw
the five great hounds in a circle keeping off the other dogs, and in
the middle of the ring a little boy was standing. He had long, beautiful
hair, and he was naked. He was not daunted by the terrible combat and
clamour of the hounds. He did not look at the hounds, but he stared like
a young prince at Fionn and the champions as they rushed towards him
scattering the pack with the butts of their spears. When the fight was
over, Bran and Sceo’lan ran whining to the little boy and licked his
hands.

“They do that to no one,” said a bystander. “What new master is this
they have found?”

Fionn bent to the boy. “Tell me, my little prince and pulse, what your
name is, and how you have come into the middle of a hunting-pack, and
why you are naked?”

But the boy did not understand the language of the men of Ireland. He
put his hand into Fionn’s, and the Chief felt as if that little hand had
been put into his heart. He lifted the lad to his great shoulder.

“We have caught something on this hunt,” said he to Caelte mac Rongn.
“We must bring this treasure home. You shall be one of the Fianna-Finn,
my darling,” he called upwards.

The boy looked down on him, and in the noble trust and fearlessness of
that regard Fionn’s heart melted away.

“My little fawn!” he said.

And he remembered that other fawn. He set the boy between his knees and
stared at him earnestly and long.

“There is surely the same look,” he said to his wakening heart; “that is
the very eye of Saeve.”

The grief flooded out of his heart as at a stroke, and joy foamed into
it in one great tide. He marched back singing to the encampment, and men
saw once more the merry Chief they had almost forgotten.



CHAPTER VI

Just as at one time he could not be parted from Saeve, so now he could
not be separated from this boy. He had a thousand names for him, each
one more tender than the last: “My Fawn, My Pulse, My Secret Little
Treasure,” or he would call him “My Music, My Blossoming Branch, My
Store in the Heart, My Soul.” And the dogs were as wild for the boy as
Fionn was. He could sit in safety among a pack that would have torn any
man to pieces, and the reason was that Bran and Sceo’lan, with their
three whelps, followed him about like shadows. When he was with the pack
these five were with him, and woeful indeed was the eye they turned
on their comrades when these pushed too closely or were not properly
humble. They thrashed the pack severally and collectively until every
hound in Fionn’s kennels knew that the little lad was their master, and
that there was nothing in the world so sacred as he was.

In no long time the five wise hounds could have given over their
guardianship, so complete was the recognition of their young lord. But
they did not so give over, for it was not love they gave the lad but
adoration.

Fionn even may have been embarrassed by their too close attendance. If
he had been able to do so he might have spoken harshly to his dogs, but
he could not; it was unthinkable that he should; and the boy might have
spoken harshly to him if he had dared to do it. For this was the order
of Fionn’s affection: first there was the boy; next, Bran and Sceo’lan
with their three whelps; then Caelte mac Rona’n, and from him down
through the champions. He loved them all, but it was along that
precedence his affections ran. The thorn that went into Bran’s foot ran
into Fionn’s also. The world knew it, and there was not a champion but
admitted sorrowfully that there was reason for his love.

Little by little the boy came to understand their speech and to speak it
himself, and at last he was able to tell his story to Fionn.

There were many blanks in the tale, for a young child does not remember
very well. Deeds grow old in a day and are buried in a night. New
memories come crowding on old ones, and one must learn to forget as well
as to remember. A whole new life had come on this boy, a life that was
instant and memorable, so that his present memories blended into and
obscured the past, and he could not be quite sure if that which he told
of had happened in this world or in the world he had left.



CHAPTER VII

“I used to live,” he said, “in a wide, beautiful place. There were hills
and valleys there, and woods and streams, but in whatever direction I
went I came always to a cliff, so tall it seemed to lean against the
sky, and so straight that even a goat would not have imagined to climb
it.”

“I do not know of any such place,” Fionn mused.

“There is no such place in Ireland,” said Caelte, “but in the Shi’ there
is such a place.”

“There is in truth,” said Fionn.

“I used to eat fruits and roots in the summer,” the boy continued, “but
in the winter food was left for me in a cave.”

“Was there no one with you?” Fionn asked.

“No one but a deer that loved me, and that I loved.”

“Ah me!” cried Fionn in anguish, “tell me your tale, my son.”

“A dark stern man came often after us, and he used to speak with the
deer. Sometimes he talked gently and softly and coaxingly, but at times
again he would shout loudly and in a harsh, angry voice. But whatever
way he talked the deer would draw away from him in dread, and he always
left her at last furiously.”

“It is the Dark Magician of the Men of God,” cried Fionn despairingly.

“It is indeed, my soul,” said Caelte.

“The last time I saw the deer,” the child continued, “the dark man was
speaking to her. He spoke for a long time. He spoke gently and angrily,
and gently and angrily, so that I thought he would never stop talking,
but in the end he struck her with a hazel rod, so that she was forced
to follow him when he went away. She was looking back at me all the time
and she was crying so bitterly that any one would pity her. I tried to
follow her also, but I could not move, and I cried after her too, with
rage and grief, until I could see her no more and hear her no more. Then
I fell on the grass, my senses went away from me, and when I awoke I was
on the hill in the middle of the hounds where you found me.”

That was the boy whom the Fianna called Oisi’n, or the Little Fawn. He
grew to be a great fighter afterwards, and he was the chief maker of
poems in the world. But he was not yet finished with the Shi. He was to
go back into Faery when the time came, and to come thence again to tell
these tales, for it was by him these tales were told.




THE WOOING OF BECFOLA



CHAPTER I

We do not know where Becfola came from. Nor do we know for certain where
she went to. We do not even know her real name, for the name Becfola,
“Dowerless” or “Small-dowered,” was given to her as a nickname. This
only is certain, that she disappeared from the world we know of, and
that she went to a realm where even conjecture may not follow her.

It happened in the days when Dermod, son of the famous Ae of Slane, was
monarch of all Ireland. He was unmarried, but he had many foster-sons,
princes from the Four Provinces, who were sent by their fathers as
tokens of loyalty and affection to the Ard-Ri, and his duties as a
foster-father were righteously acquitted. Among the young princes of his
household there was one, Crimthann, son of Ae, King of Leinster, whom
the High King preferred to the others over whom he held fatherly sway.
Nor was this wonderful, for the lad loved him also, and was as eager and
intelligent and modest as becomes a prince.

The High King and Crimthann would often set out from Tara to hunt and
hawk, sometimes unaccompanied even by a servant; and on these excursions
the king imparted to his foster-son his own wide knowledge of forest
craft, and advised him generally as to the bearing and duties of a
prince, the conduct of a court, and the care of a people.

Dermod mac Ae delighted in these solitary adventures, and when he
could steal a day from policy and affairs he would send word privily to
Crimthann. The boy, having donned his hunting gear, would join the king
at a place arranged between them, and then they ranged abroad as chance
might direct.

On one of these adventures, as they searched a flooded river to find the
ford, they saw a solitary woman in a chariot driving from the west.

“I wonder what that means?” the king exclaimed thoughtfully.

“Why should you wonder at a woman in a chariot?” his companion inquired,
for Crimthann loved and would have knowledge.

“Good, my Treasure,” Dermod answered, “our minds are astonished when we
see a woman able to drive a cow to pasture, for it has always seemed to
us that they do not drive well.”

Crimthann absorbed instruction like a sponge and digested it as rapidly.

“I think that is justly said,” he agreed.

“But,” Dermod continued, “when we see a woman driving a chariot of two
horses, then we are amazed indeed.”

When the machinery of anything is explained to us we grow interested,
and Crimthann became, by instruction, as astonished as the king was.

“In good truth,” said he, “the woman is driving two horses.”

“Had you not observed it before?” his master asked with kindly malice.

“I had observed but not noticed,” the young man admitted.

“Further,” said the king, “surmise is aroused in us when we discover a
woman far from a house; for you will have both observed and noticed that
women are home-dwellers, and that a house without a woman or a woman
without a house are imperfect objects, and although they be but half
observed, they are noticed on the double.”

“There is no doubting it,” the prince answered from a knitted and
thought-tormented brow.

“We shall ask this woman for information about herself,” said the king
decidedly.

“Let us do so,” his ward agreed

“The king’s majesty uses the words ‘we’ and ‘us’ when referring to
the king’s majesty,” said Dermod, “but princes who do not yet
rule territories must use another form of speech when referring to
themselves.”

“I am very thoughtless,” said Crimthann humbly.

The king kissed him on both cheeks.

“Indeed, my dear heart and my son, we are not scolding you, but you must
try not to look so terribly thoughtful when you think. It is part of the
art of a ruler.”

“I shall never master that hard art,” lamented his fosterling.

“We must all master it,” Dermod replied. “We may think with our minds
and with our tongues, but we should never think with our noses and with
our eyebrows.”

The woman in the chariot had drawn nigh to the ford by which they were
standing, and, without pause, she swung her steeds into the shallows and
came across the river in a tumult of foam and spray.

“Does she not drive well?” cried Crimthann admiringly.

“When you are older,” the king counselled him, “you will admire that
which is truly admirable, for although the driving is good the lady is
better.”

He continued with enthusiasm.

“She is in truth a wonder of the world and an endless delight to the
eye.”

She was all that and more, and, as she took the horses through the river
and lifted them up the bank, her flying hair and parted lips and all the
young strength and grace of her body went into the king’s eye and could
not easily come out again.

Nevertheless, it was upon his ward that the lady’s gaze rested, and if
the king could scarcely look away from her, she could, but only with an
equal effort, look away from Crimthann.

“Halt there!” cried the king.

“Who should I halt for?” the lady demanded, halting all the same, as is
the manner of women, who rebel against command and yet receive it.

“Halt for Dermod!”

“There are Dermods and Dermods in this world,” she quoted.

“There is yet but one Ard-Ri’,” the monarch answered.

She then descended from the chariot and made her reverence.

“I wish to know your name?” said he.

But at this demand the lady frowned and answered decidedly:

“I do not wish to tell it.”

“I wish to know also where you come from and to what place you are
going?”

“I do not wish to tell any of these things.”

“Not to the king!”

“I do not wish to tell them to any one.”

Crimthann was scandalised.

“Lady,” he pleaded, “you will surely not withhold information from the
Ard-Ri’?”

But the lady stared as royally on the High King as the High King did on
her, and, whatever it was he saw in those lovely eyes, the king did not
insist.

He drew Crimthann apart, for he withheld no instruction from that lad.

“My heart,” he said, “we must always try to act wisely, and we should
only insist on receiving answers to questions in which we are personally
concerned.”

Crimthann imbibed all the justice of that remark.

“Thus I do not really require to know this lady’s name, nor do I care
from what direction she comes.”

“You do not?” Crimthann asked.

“No, but what I do wish to know is, Will she marry me?”

“By my hand that is a notable question,” his companion stammered.

“It is a question that must be answered,” the king cried triumphantly.
“But,” he continued, “to learn what woman she is, or where she comes
from, might bring us torment as well as information. Who knows in what
adventures the past has engaged her!”

And he stared for a profound moment on disturbing, sinister horizons,
and Crimthann meditated there with him.

“The past is hers,” he concluded, “but the future is ours, and we shall
only demand that which is pertinent to the future.”

He returned to the lady.

“We wish you to be our wife,” he said. And he gazed on her benevolently
and firmly and carefully when he said that, so that her regard could
not stray otherwhere. Yet, even as he looked, a tear did well into those
lovely eyes, and behind her brow a thought moved of the beautiful boy
who was looking at her from the king’s side.

But when the High King of Ireland asks us to marry him we do not refuse,
for it is not a thing that we shall be asked to do every day in the
week, and there is no woman in the world but would love to rule it in
Tara.

No second tear crept on the lady’s lashes, and, with her hand in the
king’s hand, they paced together towards the palace, while behind them,
in melancholy mood, Crimthann mac Ae led the horses and the chariot.



CHAPTER II

They were married in a haste which equalled the king’s desire; and as he
did not again ask her name, and as she did not volunteer to give it, and
as she brought no dowry to her husband and received none from him, she
was called Becfola, the Dowerless.

Time passed, and the king’s happiness was as great as his expectation
of it had promised. But on the part of Becfola no similar tidings can be
given.

There are those whose happiness lies in ambition and station, and to
such a one the fact of being queen to the High King of Ireland is a
satisfaction at which desire is sated. But the mind of Becfola was not
of this temperate quality, and, lacking Crimthann, it seemed to her that
she possessed nothing.

For to her mind he was the sunlight in the sun, the brightness in the
moonbeam; he was the savour in fruit and the taste in honey; and when
she looked from Crimthann to the king she could not but consider that
the right man was in the wrong place. She thought that crowned only with
his curls Crlmthann mac Ae was more nobly diademed than are the masters
of the world, and she told him so.

His terror on hearing this unexpected news was so great that he
meditated immediate flight from Tara; but when a thing has been uttered
once it is easier said the second time and on the third repetition it is
patiently listened to.

After no great delay Crimthann mac Ae agreed and arranged that he and
Becfola should fly from Tara, and it was part of their understanding
that they should live happily ever after.

One morning, when not even a bird was astir, the king felt that his dear
companion was rising. He looked with one eye at the light that stole
greyly through the window, and recognised that it could not in justice
be called light.

“There is not even a bird up,” he murmured.

And then to Becfola.

“What is the early rising for, dear heart?”

“An engagement I have,” she replied.

“This is not a time for engagements,” said the calm monarch.

“Let it be so,” she replied, and she dressed rapidly.

“And what is the engagement?” he pursued.

“Raiment that I left at a certain place and must have. Eight silken
smocks embroidered with gold, eight precious brooches of beaten gold,
three diadems of pure gold.”

“At this hour,” said the patient king, “the bed is better than the
road.”

“Let it be so,” said she.

“And moreover,” he continued, “a Sunday journey brings bad luck.”

“Let the luck come that will come,” she answered.

“To keep a cat from cream or a woman from her gear is not work for a
king,” said the monarch severely.

The Ard-Ri’ could look on all things with composure, and regard all
beings with a tranquil eye; but it should be known that there was one
deed entirely hateful to him, and he would punish its commission with
the very last rigour--this was, a transgression of the Sunday. During
six days of the week all that could happen might happen, so far as
Dermod was concerned, but on the seventh day nothing should happen at
all if the High King could restrain it. Had it been possible he would
have tethered the birds to their own green branches on that day, and
forbidden the clouds to pack the upper world with stir and colour. These
the king permitted, with a tight lip, perhaps, but all else that came
under his hand felt his control.

It was his custom when he arose on the morn of Sunday to climb to the
most elevated point of Tara, and gaze thence on every side, so that
he might see if any fairies or people of the Shi’ were disporting
themselves in his lordship; for he absolutely prohibited the usage of
the earth to these beings on the Sunday, and woe’s worth was it for the
sweet being he discovered breaking his law.

We do not know what ill he could do to the fairies, but during Dermod’s
reign the world said its prayers on Sunday and the Shi’ folk stayed in
their hills.

It may be imagined, therefore, with what wrath he saw his wife’s
preparations for her journey, but, although a king can do everything,
what can a husband do...? He rearranged himself for slumber.

“I am no party to this untimely journey,” he said angrily.

“Let it be so,” said Becfola.

She left the palace with one maid, and as she crossed the doorway
something happened to her, but by what means it happened would be hard
to tell; for in the one pace she passed out of the palace and out of the
world, and the second step she trod was in Faery, but she did not know
this.

Her intention was to go to Cluain da chaillech to meet Crimthann, but
when she left the palace she did not remember Crimthann any more.

To her eye and to the eye of her maid the world was as it always had
been, and the landmarks they knew were about them. But the object for
which they were travelling was different, although unknown, and the
people they passed on the roads were unknown, and were yet people that
they knew.

They set out southwards from Tara into the Duffry of Leinster, and after
some time they came into wild country and went astray. At last Becfola
halted, saying:

“I do not know where we are.”

The maid replied that she also did not know.

“Yet,” said Becfola, “if we continue to walk straight on we shall arrive
somewhere.”

They went on, and the maid watered the road with her tears.

Night drew on them; a grey chill, a grey silence, and they were
enveloped in that chill and silence; and they began to go in expectation
and terror, for they both knew and did not know that which they were
bound for.

As they toiled desolately up the rustling and whispering side of a
low hill the maid chanced to look back, and when she looked back she
screamed and pointed, and clung to Becfola’s arm. Becfola followed the
pointing finger, and saw below a large black mass that moved jerkily
forward.

“Wolves!” cried the maid. “Run to the trees yonder,” her mistress
ordered. “We will climb them and sit among the branches.”

They ran then, the maid moaning and lamenting all the while.

“I cannot climb a tree,” she sobbed, “I shall be eaten by the wolves.”

And that was true.

But her mistress climbed a tree, and drew by a hand’s breadth from the
rap and snap and slaver of those steel jaws. Then, sitting on a branch,
she looked with angry woe at the straining and snarling horde below,
seeing many a white fang in those grinning jowls, and the smouldering,
red blink of those leaping and prowling eyes.



CHAPTER III

But after some time the moon arose and the wolves went away, for their
leader, a sagacious and crafty chief, declared that as long as they
remained where they were, the lady would remain where she was; and so,
with a hearty curse on trees, the troop departed. Becfola had pains in
her legs from the way she had wrapped them about the branch, but there
was no part of her that did not ache, for a lady does not sit with any
ease upon a tree.

For some time she did not care to come down from the branch. “Those
wolves may return,” she said, “for their chief is crafty and sagacious,
and it is certain, from the look I caught in his eye as he departed,
that he would rather taste of me than cat any woman he has met.”

She looked carefully in every direction to see if one might discover
them in hiding; she looked closely and lingeringly at the shadows under
distant trees to see if these shadows moved; and she listened on every
wind to try if she could distinguish a yap or a yawn or a sneeze. But
she saw or heard nothing; and little by little tranquillity crept into
her mind, and she began to consider that a danger which is past is a
danger that may be neglected.

Yet ere she descended she looked again on the world of jet and silver
that dozed about her, and she spied a red glimmer among distant trees.

“There is no danger where there is light,” she said, and she thereupon
came from the tree and ran in the direction that she had noted.

In a spot between three great oaks she came upon a man who was roasting
a wild boar over a fire. She saluted this youth and sat beside him. But
after the first glance and greeting he did not look at her again, nor
did he speak.

When the boar was cooked he ate of it and she had her share. Then he
arose from the fire and walked away among the trees. Becfola followed,
feeling ruefully that something new to her experience had arrived;
“for,” she thought, “it is usual that young men should not speak to me
now that I am the mate of a king, but it is very unusual that young men
should not look at me.”

But if the young man did not look at her she looked well at him, and
what she saw pleased her so much that she had no time for further
cogitation. For if Crimthann had been beautiful, this youth was ten
times more beautiful. The curls on Crimthann’s head had been indeed as
a benediction to the queen’s eye, so that she had eaten the better and
slept the sounder for seeing him. But the sight of this youth left her
without the desire to eat, and, as for sleep, she dreaded it, for if she
closed an eye she would be robbed of the one delight in time, which was
to look at this young man, and not to cease looking at him while her eye
could peer or her head could remain upright.

They came to an inlet of the sea all sweet and calm under the round,
silver-flooding moon, and the young man, with Becfola treading on his
heel, stepped into a boat and rowed to a high-jutting, pleasant island.
There they went inland towards a vast palace, in which there was no
person but themselves alone, and there the young man went to sleep,
while Becfola sat staring at him until the unavoidable peace pressed
down her eyelids and she too slumbered.

She was awakened in the morning by a great shout.

“Come out, Flann, come out, my heart!”

The young man leaped from his couch, girded on his harness, and strode
out. Three young men met him, each in battle harness, and these four
advanced to meet four other men who awaited them at a little distance on
the lawn. Then these two sets of four fought togethor with every warlike
courtesy but with every warlike severity, and at the end of that combat
there was but one man standing, and the other seven lay tossed in death.

Becfola spoke to the youth.

“Your combat has indeed been gallant,” she said.

“Alas,” he replied, “if it has been a gallant deed it has not been a
good one, for my three brothers are dead and my four nephews are dead.”

“Ah me!” cried Becfola, “why did you fight that fight?”

“For the lordship of this island, the Isle of Fedach, son of Dali.”

But, although Becfola was moved and horrified by this battle, it was in
another direction that her interest lay; therefore she soon asked the
question which lay next her heart:

“Why would you not speak to me or look at me?”

“Until I have won the kingship of this land from all claimants, I am no
match for the mate of the High King of Ireland,” he replied.

And that reply was llke balm to the heart of Becfola.

“What shall I do?” she inquired radiantly. “Return to your home,” he
counselled. “I will escort you there with your maid, for she is not
really dead, and when I have won my lordship I will go seek you in
Tara.”

“You will surely come,” she insisted.

“By my hand,” quoth he, “I will come.”

These three returned then, and at the end of a day and night they saw
far off the mighty roofs of Tara massed in the morning haze. The
young man left them, and with many a backward look and with dragging,
reluctant feet, Becfola crossed the threshold of the palace, wondering
what she should say to Dermod and how she could account for an absence
of three days’ duration.



CHAPTER IV

IT was so early that not even a bird was yet awake, and the dull grey
light that came from the atmosphere enlarged and made indistinct all
that one looked at, and swathed all things in a cold and livid gloom.

As she trod cautiously through dim corridors Becfola was glad that,
saving the guards, no creature was astir, and that for some time yet
she need account to no person for her movements. She was glad also of
a respite which would enable her to settle into her home and draw about
her the composure which women feel when they are surrounded by the walls
of their houses, and can see about them the possessions which, by the
fact of ownership, have become almost a part of their personality.
Sundered from her belongings, no woman is tranquil, her heart is not
truly at ease, however her mind may function, so that under the broad
sky or in the house of another she is not the competent, precise
individual which she becomes when she sees again her household in order
and her domestic requirements at her hand.

Becfola pushed the door of the king’s sleeping chamber and entered
noiselessly. Then she sat quietly in a seat gazing on the recumbent
monarch, and prepared to consider how she should advance to him when
he awakened, and with what information she might stay his inquiries or
reproaches.

“I will reproach him,” she thought. “I will call him a bad husband
and astonish him, and he will forget everything but his own alarm and
indignation.”

But at that moment the king lifted his head from the pillow and looked
kindly at her. Her heart gave a great throb, and she prepared to speak
at once and in great volume before he could formulate any question.
But the king spoke first, and what he said so astonished her that the
explanation and reproach with which her tongue was thrilling fled
from it at a stroke, and she could only sit staring and bewildered and
tongue-tied.

“Well, my dear heart,” said the king, “have you decided not to keep that
engagement?”

“I--I--!” Becfola stammered.

“It is truly not an hour for engagements,” Dermod insisted, “for not
a bird of the birds has left his tree; and,” he continued maliciously,
“the light is such that you could not see an engagement even if you met
one.”

“I,” Becfola gasped. “I---!”

“A Sunday journey,” he went on, “is a notorious bad journey. No good can
come from it. You can get your smocks and diadems to-morrow. But at this
hour a wise person leaves engagements to the bats and the staring owls
and the round-eyed creatures that prowl and sniff in the dark. Come back
to the warm bed, sweet woman, and set on your journey in the morning.”

Such a load of apprehension was lifted from Becfola’s heart that she
instantly did as she had been commanded, and such a bewilderment had yet
possession of her faculties that she could not think or utter a word on
any subject.

Yet the thought did come into her head as she stretched in the warm
gloom that Crimthann the son of Ae must be now attending her at
Cluain da chaillech, and she thought of that young man as of something
wonderful and very ridiculous, and the fact that he was waiting for
her troubled her no more than if a sheep had been waiting for her or a
roadside bush.

She fell asleep.



CHAPTER V

In the morning as they sat at breakfast four clerics were announced, and
when they entered the king looked on them with stern disapproval.

“What is the meaning of this journey on Sunday?” he demanded.

A lank-jawed, thin-browed brother, with uneasy, intertwining fingers,
and a deep-set, venomous eye, was the spokesman of those four.

“Indeed,” he said, and the fingers of his right hand strangled and did
to death the fingers of his left hand, “indeed, we have transgressed by
order.”

“Explain that.”

“We have been sent to you hurriedly by our master, Molasius of
Devenish.”

“A pious, a saintly man,” the king interrupted, “and one who does not
countenance transgressions of the Sunday.”

“We were ordered to tell you as follows,” said the grim cleric, and he
buried the fingers of his right hand in his left fist, so that one could
not hope to see them resurrected again. “It was the duty of one of
the Brothers of Devenish,” he continued, “to turn out the cattle this
morning before the dawn of day, and that Brother, while in his duty, saw
eight comely young men who fought together.”

“On the morning of Sunday,” Dermod exploded.

The cleric nodded with savage emphasis.

“On the morning of this self-same and instant sacred day.”

“Tell on,” said the king wrathfully.

But terror gripped with sudden fingers at Becfola’s heart.

“Do not tell horrid stories on the Sunday,” she pleaded. “No good can
come to any one from such a tale.”

“Nay, this must be told, sweet lady,” said the king. But the cleric
stared at her glumly, forbiddingly, and resumed his story at a gesture.

“Of these eight men, seven were killed.”

“They are in hell,” the king said gloomily.

“In hell they are,” the cleric replied with enthusiasm.

“And the one that was not killed?”

“He is alive,” that cleric responded.

“He would be,” the monarch assented. “Tell your tale.”

“Molasius had those seven miscreants buried, and he took from their
unhallowed necks and from their lewd arms and from their unblessed
weapons the load of two men in gold and silver treasure.”

“Two men’s load!” said Dermod thoughtfully.

“That much,” said the lean cleric. “No more, no less. And he has sent us
to find out what part of that hellish treasure belongs to the Brothers
of Devenish and how much is the property of the king.”

Becfola again broke in, speaking graciously, regally, hastily: “Let
those Brothers have the entire of the treasure, for it is Sunday
treasure, and as such it will bring no luck to any one.”

The cleric again looked at her coldly, with a harsh-lidded, small-set,
grey-eyed glare, and waited for the king’s reply.

Dermod pondered, shaking his head as to an argument on his left side,
and then nodding it again as to an argument on his right.

“It shall be done as this sweet queen advises. Let a reliquary be formed
with cunning workmanship of that gold and silver, dated with my date and
signed with my name, to be in memory of my grandmother who gave birth to
a lamb, to a salmon, and then to my father, the Ard-Ri’. And, as to the
treasure that remains over, a pastoral staff may be beaten from it in
honour of Molasius, the pious man.”

“The story is not ended,” said that glum, spike-chinned cleric.

The king moved with jovial impatience.

“If you continue it,” he said, “it will surely come to an end some time.
A stone on a stone makes a house, dear heart, and a word on a word tells
a tale.”

The cleric wrapped himself into himself, and became lean and menacing.
He whispered: “Besides the young man, named Flann, who was not slain,
there was another person present at the scene and the combat and the
transgression of Sunday.”

“Who was that person?” said the alarmed monarch.

The cleric spiked forward his chin, and then butted forward his brow.

“It was the wife of the king,” he shouted. “It was the woman called
Becfola. It was that woman,” he roared, and he extended a lean,
inflexible, unending first finger at the queen.

“Dog!” the king stammered, starting up.

“If that be in truth a woman,” the cleric screamed.

“What do you mean?” the king demanded in wrath and terror.

“Either she is a woman of this world to be punished, or she is a woman
of the Shi’ to be banished, but this holy morning she was in the Shi’,
and her arms were about the neck of Flann.”

The king sank back in his chair stupefied, gazing from one to the other,
and then turned an unseeing, fear-dimmed eye towards Becfola.

“Is this true, my pulse?” he murmured.

“It is true,” Becfola replied, and she became suddenly to the king’s eye
a whiteness and a stare. He pointed to the door.

“Go to your engagement,” he stammered. “Go to that Flann.”

“He is waiting for me,” said Becfola with proud shame, “and the thought
that he should wait wrings my heart.”

She went out from the palace then. She went away from Tara: and in all
Ireland and in the world of living men she was not seen again, and she
was never heard of again.




THE LITTLE BRAWL AT ALLEN



CHAPTER I

“I think,” said Cairell Whiteskin, “that although judgement was given
against Fionn, it was Fionn had the rights of it.”

“He had eleven hundred killed,” said Cona’n amiably, “and you may call
that the rights of it if you like.”

“All the same--” Cairell began argumentatively.

“And it was you that commenced it,” Cona’n continued.

“Ho! Ho!” Cairell cried. “Why, you are as much to blame as I am.”

“No,” said Cona’n, “for you hit me first.”

“And if we had not been separated--” the other growled.

“Separated!” said Cona’n, with a grin that made his beard poke all
around his face.

“Yes, separated. If they had not come between us I still think--”

“Don’t think out loud, dear heart, for you and I are at peace by law.”

“That is true,” said Cairell, “and a man must stick by a judgement. Come
with me, my dear, and let us see how the youngsters are shaping in the
school. One of them has rather a way with him as a swordsman.”

“No youngster is any good with a sword,” Conan replied.

“You are right there,” said Cairell. “It takes a good ripe man for that
weapon.”

“Boys are good enough with slings,” Confro continued, “but except for
eating their fill and running away from a fight, you can’t count on
boys.”

The two bulky men turned towards the school of the Fianna.

It happened that Fionn mac Uail had summoned the gentlemen of the Fianna
and their wives to a banquet. Everybody came, for a banquet given by
Fionn was not a thing to be missed. There was Goll mor mac Morna and his
people; Fionn’s son Oisi’n and his grandson Oscar. There was Dermod of
the Gay Face, Caelte mac Ronan--but indeed there were too many to be
told of, for all the pillars of war and battle-torches of the Gael were
there.

The banquet began.

Fionn sat in the Chief Captain’s seat in the middle of the fort; and
facing him, in the place of honour, he placed the mirthful Goll mac
Morna; and from these, ranging on either side, the nobles of the Fianna
took each the place that fitted his degree and patrimony.

After good eating, good conversation; and after good conversation,
sleep--that is the order of a banquet: so when each person had been
served with food to the limit of desire the butlers carried in shining,
and jewelled drinking-horns, each having its tide of smooth, heady
liquor. Then the young heroes grew merry and audacious, the ladies
became gentle and kind, and the poets became wonders of knowledge and
prophecy. Every eye beamed in that assembly, and on Fionn every eye was
turned continually in the hope of a glance from the great, mild hero.

Goll spoke to him across the table enthusiastically.

“There is nothing wanting to this banquet, O Chief,” said he.

And Fionn smiled back into that eye which seemed a well of tenderness
and friendship.

“Nothing is wanting,” he replied, “but a well-shaped poem.” A crier
stood up then, holding in one hand a length of coarse iron links and in
the other a chain of delicate, antique silver. He shook the iron chain
so that the servants and followers of the household should be silent,
and he shook the silver one so that the nobles and poets should hearken
also.

Fergus, called True-Lips, the poet of the Fianna-Finn, then sang of
Fionn and his ancestors and their deeds. When he had finished Fionn and
Oisi’n and Oscar and mac Lugac of the Terrible Hand gave him rare and
costly presents, so that every person wondered at their munificence, and
even the poet, accustomed to the liberality of kings and princes, was
astonished at his gifts.

Fergus then turned to the side of Goll mac Morna, and he sang of the
Forts, the Destructions, the Raids, and the Wooings of clann-Morna; and
as the poems succeeded each other, Goll grew more and more jovial and
contented. When the songs were finished Goll turned in his seat.

“Where is my runner?” he cried.

He had a woman runner, a marvel for swiftness and trust. She stepped
forward.

“I am here, royal captain.”

“Have you collected my tribute from Denmark?”

“It is here.”

And, with help, she laid beside him the load of three men of doubly
refined gold. Out of this treasure, and from the treasure of rings and
bracelets and torques that were with him, Goll mac Morna paid Fergus for
his songs, and, much as Fionn had given, Goll gave twice as much.

But, as the banquet proceeded, Goll gave, whether it was to harpers or
prophets or jugglers, more than any one else gave, so that Fionn became
displeased, and as the banquet proceeded he grew stern and silent.



CHAPTER II

[This version of the death of Uail is not correct. Also Cnocha is not in
Lochlann but in Ireland.]


The wonderful gift-giving of Goll continued, and an uneasiness and
embarrassment began to creep through the great banqueting hall.

Gentlemen looked at each other questioningly, and then spoke again on
indifferent matters, but only with half of their minds. The singers, the
harpers, and jugglers submitted to that constraint, so that every person
felt awkward and no one knew what should be done or what would happen,
and from that doubt dulness came, with silence following on its heels.

There is nothing more terrible than silence. Shame grows in that blank,
or anger gathers there, and we must choose which of these is to be our
master.

That choice lay before Fionn, who never knew shame.

“Goll,” said he, “how long have you been taking tribute from the people
of Lochlann?”

“A long time now,” said Goll.

And he looked into an eye that was stern and unfriendly.

“I thought that my rent was the only one those people had to pay,” Fionn
continued.

“Your memory is at fault,” said Goll.

“Let it be so,” said Fionn. “How did your tribute arise?”

“Long ago, Fionn, in the days when your father forced war on me.”

“Ah!” said Fionn.

“When he raised the High King against me and banished me from Ireland.”

“Continue,” said Fionn, and he held Goll’s eye under the great beetle of
his brow.

“I went into Britain,” said Goll, “and your father followed me there. I
went into White Lochlann (Norway) and took it. Your father banished me
thence also.”

“I know it,” said Fionn.

“I went into the land of the Saxons and your father chased me out of
that land. And then, in Lochlann, at the battle of Cnocha your father
and I met at last, foot to foot, eye to eye, and there, Fionn!”

“And there, Goll?”

“And there I killed your father.”

Fionn sat rigid and unmoving, his face stony and terrible as the face of
a monument carved on the side of a cliff.

“Tell all your tale,” said he.

“At that battle I beat the Lochlannachs. I penetrated to the hold of the
Danish king, and I took out of his dungeon the men who had lain
there for a year and were awaiting their deaths. I liberated fifteen
prisoners, and one of them was Fionn.”

“It is true,” said Fionn.

Goll’s anger fled at the word.

“Do not be jealous of me, dear heart, for if I had twice the tribute I
would give it to you and to Ireland.”

But at the word jealous the Chief’s anger revived.

“It is an impertinence,” he cried, “to boast at this table that you
killed my father.”

“By my hand,” Goll replied, “if Fionn were to treat me as his father did
I would treat Fionn the way I treated Fionn’s father.”

Fionn closed his eyes and beat away the anger that was rising within
him. He smiled grimly.

“If I were so minded, I would not let that last word go with you, Goll,
for I have here an hundred men for every man of yours.”

Goll laughed aloud.

“So had your father,” he said.

Fionn’s brother, Cairell Whiteskin, broke into the conversation with a
harsh laugh.

“How many of Fionn’s household has the wonderful Goll put down?” he
cried.

But Goll’s brother, bald Cona’n the Swearer, turned a savage eye on
Cairell.

“By my weapons,” said he, “there were never less than an hundred-and-one
men with Goll, and the least of them could have put you down easily
enough.”

“Ah?” cried Cairell. “And are you one of the hundred-and-one, old
scaldhead?”

“One indeed, my thick-witted, thin-livered Cairell, and I undertake to
prove on your hide that what my brother said was true and that what your
brother said was false.”

“You undertake that,” growled Cairell, and on the word he loosed a
furious buffet at Con’an, which Cona’n returned with a fist so big that
every part of Cairell’s face was hit with the one blow. The two then
fell into grips, and went lurching and punching about the great hall.
Two of Oscar’s sons could not bear to see their uncle being worsted, and
they leaped at Cona’n, and two of Goll’s sons rushed at them. Then Oscar
himself leaped up, and with a hammer in either hand he went battering
into the melee.

“I thank the gods,” said Cona’n, “for the chance of killing yourself,
Oscar.”

These two encountered then, and Oscar knocked a groan of distress out of
Cona’n. He looked appealingly at his brother Art og mac Morna, and that
powerful champion flew to his aid and wounded Oscar. Oisi’n, Oscar’s
father, could not abide that; he dashed in and quelled Art Og. Then
Rough Hair mac Morna wounded Oisin and was himself tumbled by mac Lugac,
who was again wounded by Gara mac Morna.

The banqueting hall was in tumult. In every part of it men were giving
and taking blows. Here two champions with their arms round each other’s
necks were stamping round and round in a slow, sad dance. Here were two
crouching against each other, looking for a soft place to hit. Yonder a
big-shouldered person lifted another man in his arms and threw him at a
small group that charged him. In a retired corner a gentleman stood in
a thoughtful attitude while he tried to pull out a tooth that had been
knocked loose.

“You can’t fight,” he mumbled, “with a loose shoe or a loose tooth.”

“Hurry up with that tooth,” the man in front of him grum-bled, “for I
want to knock out another one.”

Pressed against the wall was a bevy of ladies, some of whom were
screaming and some laughing and all of whom were calling on the men to
go back to their seats.

Only two people remained seated in the hall.

Goll sat twisted round watching the progress of the brawl critically,
and Fionn, sitting opposite, watched Goll.

Just then Faelan, another of Fionn’s sons, stormed the hall with three
hundred of the Fianna, and by this force all Goll’s people were put out
of doors, where the fight continued.

Goll looked then calmly on Fionn.

“Your people are using their weapons,” said he.

“Are they?” Fionn inquired as calmly, and as though addressing the air.

“In the matter of weapons--!” said Goll.

And the hard-fighting pillar of battle turned to where his arms hung on
the wall behind him. He took his solid, well-balanced sword in his fist,
over his left arm his ample, bossy shield, and, with another side-look
at Fionn, he left the hall and charged irresistibly into the fray.

Fionn then arose. He took his accoutrements from the wall also and
strode out. Then he raised the triumphant Fenian shout and went into the
combat.

That was no place for a sick person to be. It was not the corner which
a slender-fingered woman would choose to do up her hair; nor was it the
spot an ancient man would select to think quietly in, for the tumult of
sword on sword, of axe on shield, the roar of the contending parties,
the crying of wounded men, and the screaming of frightened women
destroyed peace, and over all was the rallying cry of Goll mac Morna and
the great shout of Fionn.

Then Fergus True-Lips gathered about him all the poets of the Fianna,
and they surrounded the combatants. They began to chant and intone
long, heavy rhymes and incantations, until the rhythmic beating of their
voices covered even the noise of war, so that the men stopped hacking
and hewing, and let their weapons drop from their hands. These were
picked up by the poets and a reconciliation was effected between the two
parties.

But Fionn affirmed that he would make no peace with clann-Morna until
the matter had been judged by the king, Cormac mac Art, and by his
daughter Ailve, and by his son Cairbre of Ana Life’ and by Fintan the
chief poet. Goll agreed that the affair should be submitted to that
court, and a day was appointed, a fortnight from that date, to meet
at Tara of the Kings for judgement. Then the hall was cleansed and the
banquet recommenced.

Of Fionn’s people eleven hundred of men and women were dead, while of
Goll’s people eleven men and fifty women were dead. But it was through
fright the women died, for not one of them had a wound or a bruise or a
mark.



CHAPTER III

AT the end of a fortnight Fionn and Goll and the chief men of the Fianna
attended at Tara. The king, his son and daughter, with Flahri, Feehal,
and Fintan mac Bocna sat in the place of judgement, and Cormac called on
the witnesses for evidence.

Fionn stood up, but the moment he did so Goll mac Morna arose also.

“I object to Fionn giving evidence,” said he.

“Why so?” the king asked.

“Because in any matter that concerned me Fionn would turn a lie into
truth and the truth into a lie.”

“I do not think that is so,” said Fionn.

“You see, he has already commenced it,” cried Goll.

“If you object to the testimony of the chief person present, in what way
are we to obtain evidence?” the king demanded.

“I,” said Goll, “will trust to the evidence of Fergus True-Lips. He is
Fionn’s poet, and will tell no lie against his master; he is a poet, and
will tell no lie against any one.”

“I agree to that,” said Fionn.

“I require, nevertheless,” Goll continued, “that Fergus should swear
before the Court, by his gods, that he will do justice between us.”

Fergus was accordingly sworn, and gave his evidence. He stated that
Fionn’s brother Cairell struck Cona’n mac Morna, that Goll’s two sons
came to help Cona’n, that Oscar went to help Cairell, and with that
Fionn’s people and the clann-Morna rose at each other, and what had
started as a brawl ended as a battle with eleven hundred of Fionn’s
people and sixty-one of Goll’s people dead.

“I marvel,” said the king in a discontented voice, “that, considering
the numbers against them, the losses of clann-Morna should be so small.”

Fionn blushed when he heard that.

Fergus replied:

“Goll mac Morna covered his people with his shield. All that slaughter
was done by him.”

“The press was too great,” Fionn grumbled. “I could not get at him in
time or---”

“Or what?” said Goll with a great laugh.

Fionn shook his head sternly and said no more.

“What is your judgement?” Cormac demanded of his fellow-judges.

Flahri pronounced first.

“I give damages to clann-Morna.”

“Why?” said Cormac.

“Because they were attacked first.”

Cormac looked at him stubbornly.

“I do not agree with your judgement,” he said.

“What is there faulty in it?” Flahri asked.

“You have not considered,” the king replied, “that a soldier owes
obedience to his captain, and that, given the time and the place, Fionn
was the captain and Goll was only a simple soldier.”

Flahri considered the king’s suggestion.

“That,” he said, “would hold good for the white-striking or blows of
fists, but not for the red-striking or sword-strokes.”

“What is your judgement?” the king asked Feehal. Feehal then pronounced:

“I hold that clann-Morna were attacked first, and that they are to be
free from payment of damages.”

“And as regards Fionn?” said Cormac.

“I hold that on account of his great losses Fionn is to be exempt
from payment of damages, and that his losses are to be considered as
damages.”

“I agree in that judgement,” said Fintan.

The king and his son also agreed, and the decision was imparted to the
Fianna.

“One must abide by a judgement,” said Fionn.

“Do you abide by it?” Goll demanded.

“I do,” said Fionn.

Goll and Fionn then kissed each other, and thus peace was made. For,
notwithstanding the endless bicker of these two heroes, they loved each
other well.


Yet, now that the years have gone by, I think the fault lay with Goll
and not with Fionn, and that the judgement given did not consider
everything. For at that table Goll should not have given greater gifts
than his master and host did. And it was not right of Goll to take by
force the position of greatest gift-giver of the Fianna, for there was
never in the world one greater at giving gifts, or giving battle, or
making poems than Fionn was.

That side of the affair was not brought before the Court. But perhaps it
was suppressed out of delicacy for Fionn, for if Goll could be accused
of ostentation, Fionn was open to the uglier charge of jealousy. It
was, nevertheless, Goll’s forward and impish temper which commenced the
brawl, and the verdict of time must be to exonerate Fionn and to let the
blame go where it is merited.

There is, however, this to be added and remembered, that whenever Fionn
was in a tight corner it was Goll that plucked him out of it; and, later
on, when time did his worst on them all and the Fianna were sent to hell
as unbelievers, it was Goll mac Morna who assaulted hell, with a chain
in his great fist and three iron balls swinging from it, and it was
he who attacked the hosts of great devils and brought Fionn and the
Fianna-Finn out with him.




THE CARL OF THE DRAB COAT



CHAPTER I

One day something happened to Fionn, the son of Uail; that is, he
departed from the world of men, and was set wandering in great distress
of mind through Faery. He had days and nights there and adventures
there, and was able to bring back the memory of these.

That, by itself, is wonderful, for there are few people who remember
that they have been to Faery or aught of all that happened to them in
that state.

In truth we do not go to Faery, we become Faery, and in the beating of a
pulse we may live for a year or a thousand years. But when we return
the memory is quickly clouded, and we seem to have had a dream or seen a
vision, although we have verily been in Faery.

It was wonderful, then, that Fionn should have remembered all that
happened to him in that wide-spun moment, but in this tale there is yet
more to marvel at; for not only did Fionn go to Faery, but the great
army which he had marshalled to Ben Edair [The Hill of Howth] were
translated also, and neither he nor they were aware that they had
departed from the world until they came back to it.

Fourteen battles, seven of the reserve and seven of the regular Fianna,
had been taken by the Chief on a great march and manoeuvre. When they
reached Ben Edair it was decided to pitch camp so that the troops
might rest in view of the warlike plan which Fionn had imagined for the
morrow. The camp was chosen, and each squadron and company of the host
were lodged into an appropriate place, so there was no overcrowding and
no halt or interruption of the march; for where a company halted that
was its place of rest, and in that place it hindered no other company,
and was at its own ease.

When this was accomplished the leaders of battalions gathered on a
level, grassy plateau overlooking the sea, where a consultation began
as to the next day’s manoeuvres, and during this discussion they looked
often on the wide water that lay wrinkling and twinkling below them.

A roomy ship under great press of sall was bearing on Ben Edair from the
east.

Now and again, in a lull of the discussion, a champion would look and
remark on the hurrying vessel; and it may have been during one of these
moments that the adventure happened to Fionn and the Fianna.

“I wonder where that ship comes from?” said Cona’n idly.

But no person could surmise anything about it beyond that it was a
vessel well equipped for war.

As the ship drew by the shore the watchers observed a tall man swing
from the side by means of his spear shafts, and in a little while this
gentleman was announced to Fionn, and was brought into his presence.

A sturdy, bellicose, forthright personage he was indeed. He was equipped
in a wonderful solidity of armour, with a hard, carven helmet on
his head, a splendid red-bossed shield swinging on his shoulder, a
wide-grooved, straight sword clashing along his thigh. On his shoulders
under the shield he carried a splendid scarlet mantle; over his breast
was a great brooch of burnt gold, and in his fist he gripped a pair of
thick-shafted, unburnished spears.

Fionn and the champions looked on this gentleman, and they admired
exceedingly his bearing and equipment.

“Of what blood are you, young gentleman?” Fionn demanded, “and from
which of the four corners of the world do you come?”

“My name is Cael of the Iron,” the stranger answered, “and I am son to
the King of Thessaly.”

“What errand has brought you here?”

“I do not go on errands,” the man replied sternly, “but on the affairs
that please me.”

“Be it so. What is the pleasing affair which brings you to this land?”

“Since I left my own country I have not gone from a land or an island
until it paid tribute to me and acknowledged my lordship.”

“And you have come to this realm,” cried Fionn, doubting his ears.

“For tribute and sovereignty,” growled that other, and he struck the
haft of his spear violently on the ground.

“By my hand,” said Cona’n, “we have never heard of a warrior, however
great, but his peer was found in Ireland, and the funeral songs of all
such have been chanted by the women of this land.”

“By my hand and word,” said the harsh stranger, “your talk makes me
think of a small boy or of an idiot.”

“Take heed, sir,” said Fionn, “for the champions and great dragons of
the Gael are standing by you, and around us there are fourteen battles
of the Fianna of Ireland.”

“If all the Fianna who have died in the last seven years were added to
all that are now here,” the stranger asserted, “I would treat all of
these and those grievously, and would curtail their limbs and their
lives.”

“It is no small boast,” Cona’n murmured, staring at him.

“It is no boast at all,” said Cael, “and, to show my quality and
standing, I will propose a deed to you.”

“Give out your deed,” Fionn commanded.

“Thus,” said Cael with cold savagery. “If you can find a man among your
fourteen battalions who can outrun or outwrestle or outfight me, I will
take myself off to my own country, and will trouble you no more.”

And so harshly did he speak, and with such a belligerent eye did he
stare, that dismay began to seize on the champions, and even Fionn felt
that his breath had halted.

“It is spoken like a hero,” he admitted after a moment, “and if you
cannot be matched on those terms it will not be from a dearth of
applicants.”

“In running alone,” Fionn continued thoughtfully, “we have a notable
champion, Caelte mac Rona’n.”

“This son of Rona’n will not long be notable,” the stranger asserted.

“He can outstrip the red deer,” said Cona’n.

“He can outrun the wind,” cried Fionn.

“He will not be asked to outrun the red deer or the wind,” the stranger
sneered. “He will be asked to outrun me,” he thundered. “Produce this
runner, and we shall discover if he keeps as great heart in his feet as
he has made you think.”

“He is not with us,” Cona’n lamented.

“These notable warriors are never with us when the call is made,” said
the grim stranger.

“By my hand,” cried Fionn, “he shall be here in no great time, for I
will fetch him myself.”

“Be it so,” said Cael. “And during my absence,” Fionn continued, “I
leave this as a compact, that you make friends with the Fianna here
present, and that you observe all the conditions and ceremonies of
friendship.”

Cael agreed to that.

“I will not hurt any of these people until you return,” he said.

Fionn then set out towards Tara of the Kings, for he thought Caelte mac
Romin would surely be there; “and if he is not there,” said the champion
to himself, “then I shall find him at Cesh Corran of the Fianna.”



CHAPTER II

He had not gone a great distance from Ben Edair when he came to
an intricate, gloomy wood, where the trees grew so thickly and the
undergrowth was such a sprout and tangle that one could scarcely pass
through it. He remembered that a path had once been hacked through the
wood, and he sought for this. It was a deeply scooped, hollow way, and
it ran or wriggled through the entire length of the wood.

Into this gloomy drain Fionn descended and made progress, but when he
had penetrated deeply in the dank forest he heard a sound of thumping
and squelching footsteps, and he saw coming towards him a horrible,
evil-visaged being; a wild, monstrous, yellow-skinned, big-boned giant,
dressed in nothing but an ill-made, mud-plastered, drab-coloured coat,
which swaggled and clapped against the calves of his big bare legs. On
his stamping feet there were great brogues of boots that were shaped
like, but were bigger than, a boat, and each time he put a foot down it
squashed and squirted a barrelful of mud from the sunk road.

Fionn had never seen the like of this vast person, and he stood gazing
on him, lost in a stare of astonishment.

The great man saluted him.

“All alone, Fionn?” he cried. “How does it happen that not one Fenian
of the Fianna is at the side of his captain?” At this inquiry Fionn got
back his wits.

“That is too long a story and it is too intricate and pressing to be
told, also I have no time to spare now.”

“Yet tell it now,” the monstrous man insisted.

Fionn, thus pressed, told of the coming of Cael of the Iron, of the
challenge the latter had issued, and that he, Fionn, was off to Tara of
the Kings to find Caelte mac Rona’n.

“I know that foreigner well,” the big man commented.

“Is he the champion he makes himself out to be?” Fionn inquired.

“He can do twice as much as he said he would do,” the monster replied.

“He won’t outrun Caelte mac Rona’n,” Fionn asserted. The big man jeered.

“Say that he won’t outrun a hedgehog, dear heart. This Cael will end the
course by the time your Caelte begins to think of starting.”

“Then,” said Fionn, “I no longer know where to turn, or how to protect
the honour of Ireland.”

“I know how to do these things,” the other man commented with a slow nod
of the head.

“If you do,” Fionn pleaded, “tell it to me upon your honour.”

“I will do that,” the man replied.

“Do not look any further for the rusty-kneed, slow-trotting son of
Rona’n,” he continued, “but ask me to run your race, and, by this hand,
I will be first at the post.”

At this the Chief began to laugh.

“My good friend, you have work enough to carry the two tons of mud that
are plastered on each of your coat-tails, to say nothing of your weighty
boots.”

“By my hand,” the man cried, “there is no person in Ireland but myself
can win that race. I claim a chance.”

Fionn agreed then. “Be it so,” said he. “And now, tell me your name?”

“I am known as the Carl of the Drab Coat.”

“All names are names,” Fionn responded, “and that also is a name.”

They returned then to Ben Edair.



CHAPTER III

When they came among the host the men of Ireland gathered about the vast
stranger; and there were some who hid their faces in their mantles so
that they should not be seen to laugh, and there were some who rolled
along the ground in merriment, and there were others who could only hold
their mouths open and crook their knees and hang their arms and stare
dumbfoundedly upon the stranger, as though they were utterly dazed.

Cael of the Iron came also on the scene, and he examined the stranger
with close and particular attention.

“What in the name of the devil is this thing?” he asked of Fionn.

“Dear heart,” said Fionn, “this is the champion I am putting against you
in the race.”

Cael of the Iron grew purple in the face, and he almost swallowed his
tongue through wrath.

“Until the end of eternity,” he roared, “and until the very last moment
of doom I will not move one foot in a race with this greasy, big-hoofed,
ill-assembled resemblance of a beggarman.”

But at this the Carl burst into a roar of laughter, so that the eardrums
of the warriors present almost burst inside of their heads.

“Be reassured, my darling, I am no beggarman, and my quality is not more
gross than is the blood of the most delicate prince in this assembly.
You will not evade your challenge in that way, my love, and you shall
run with me or you shall run to your ship with me behind you. What
length of course do you propose, dear heart?”

“I never run less than sixty miles,” Cael replied sullenly.

“It is a small run,” said the Carl, “but it will do. From this place
to the Hill of the Rushes, Slieve Luachra of Munster, is exactly sixty
miles. Will that suit you?”

“I don’t care how it is done,” Cael answered.

“Then,” said the Carl, “we may go off to Slieve Luachra now, and in the
morning we can start our race there to here.”

“Let it be done that way,” said Cael.

These two set out then for Munster, and as the sun was setting they
reached Slieve Luachra and prepared to spend the night there.



CHAPTER IV

“Cael, my pulse,” said the Carl, “we had better build a house or a hut
to pass the night in.”

“I’Il build nothing,” Cael replied, looking on the Carl with great
disfavour.

“No!”

“I won’t build house or hut for the sake of passing one night here, for
I hope never to see this place again.”

“I’Il build a house myself,” said the Carl, “and the man who does not
help in the building can stay outside of the house.”

The Carl stumped to a near-by wood, and he never rested until he had
felled and tied together twenty-four couples of big timber. He thrust
these under one arm and under the other he tucked a bundle of rushes for
his bed, and with that one load he rushed up a house, well thatched and
snug, and with the timber that remained over he made a bonfire on the
floor of the house.

His companion sat at a distance regarding the work with rage and
aversion.

“Now Cael, my darling,” said the Carl, “if you are a man help me to look
for something to eat, for there is game here.”

“Help yourself,” roared Cael, “for all that I want is not to be near
you.”

“The tooth that does not help gets no helping,” the other replied.

In a short time the Carl returned with a wild boar which he had run
down. He cooked the beast over his bonfire and ate one half of it,
leaving the other half for his breakfast. Then he lay down on the
rushes, and in two turns he fell asleep.

But Cael lay out on the side of the hill, and if he went to sleep that
night he slept fasting. It was he, however, who awakened the Carl in the
morning.

“Get up, beggarman, if you are going to run against me.”

The Carl rubbed his eyes.

“I never get up until I have had my fill of sleep, and there is another
hour of it due to me. But if you are in a hurry, my delight, you can
start running now with a blessing. I will trot on your track when I
waken up.”

Cael began to race then, and he was glad of the start, for his
antagonist made so little account of him that he did not know what to
expect when the Carl would begin to run.

“Yet,” said Cael to himself, “with an hour’s start the beggarman will
have to move his bones if he wants to catch on me,” and he settled down
to a good, pelting race.



CHAPTER V

At the end of an hour the Carl awoke. He ate the second half of the
boar, and he tied the unpicked bones in the tail of his coat. Then with
a great rattling of the boar’s bones he started.

It is hard to tell how he ran or at what speed he ran, but he went
forward in great two-legged jumps, and at times he moved in
immense one-legged, mud-spattering hops, and at times again, with
wide-stretched, far-flung, terrible-tramping, space-destroying legs he
ran.

He left the swallows behind as if they were asleep. He caught up on
a red deer, jumped over it, and left it standing. The wind was always
behind him, for he outran it every time; and he caught up in jumps and
bounces on Cael of the Iron, although Cael was running well, with
his fists up and his head back and his two legs flying in and out so
vigorously that you could not see them because of that speedy movement.

Trotting by the side of Cael, the Carl thrust a hand into the tail of
his coat and pulled out a fistfull of red bones.

“Here, my heart, is a meaty bone,” said he, “for you fasted all night,
poor friend, and if you pick a bit off the bone your stomach will get a
rest.”

“Keep your filth, beggarman,” the other replied, “for I would rather be
hanged than gnaw on a bone that you have browsed.”

“Why don’t you run, my pulse?” said the Carl earnestly; “why don’t you
try to win the race?”

Cael then began to move his limbs as if they were the wings of a fly,
or the fins of a little fish, or as if they were the six legs of a
terrified spider.

“I am running,” he gasped.

“But try and run like this,” the Carl admonished, and he gave a
wriggling bound and a sudden outstretching and scurrying of shanks, and
he disappeared from Cael’s sight in one wild spatter of big boots.

Despair fell on Cael of the Iron, but he had a great heart. “I will run
until I burst,” he shrieked, “and when I burst, may I burst to a great
distance, and may I trip that beggar-man up with my burstings and make
him break his leg.”

He settled then to a determined, savage, implacable trot. He caught up
on the Carl at last, for the latter had stopped to eat blackberries from
the bushes on the road, and when he drew nigh, Cael began to jeer and
sneer angrily at the Carl.

“Who lost the tails of his coat?” he roared.

“Don’t ask riddles of a man that’s eating blackberries,” the Carl
rebuked him.

“The dog without a tall and the coat without a tail,” cried Cael.

“I give it up,” the Carl mumbled.

“It’s yourself, beggarman,” jeered Cael.

“I am myself,” the Carl gurgled through a mouthful of blackberries,
“and as I am myself, how can it be myself? That is a silly riddle,” he
burbled.

“Look at your coat, tub of grease?”

The Carl did so.

“My faith,” said he, “where are the two tails of my coat?” “I could
smell one of them and it wrapped around a little tree thirty miles
back,” said Cael, “and the other one was dishonouring a bush ten miles
behind that.”

“It is bad luck to be separated from the tails of your own coat,” the
Carl grumbled. “I’ll have to go back for them. Wait here, beloved, and
eat blackberries until I come back, and we’ll both start fair.”

“Not half a second will I wait,” Cael replied, and he began to run
towards Ben Edair as a lover runs to his maiden or as a bee flies to his
hive.

“I haven’t had half my share of blackberries either,” the Carl lamented
as he started to run backwards for his coat-tails.

He ran determinedly on that backward journey, and as the path he had
travelled was beaten out as if it had been trampled by an hundred bulls
yoked neck to neck, he was able to find the two bushes and the two
coat-tails. He sewed them on his coat.

Then he sprang up, and he took to a fit and a vortex and an exasperation
of running for which no description may be found. The thumping of his
big boots grew as con-tinuous as the pattering of hailstones on a
roof, and the wind of his passage blew trees down. The beasts that were
ranging beside his path dropped dead from concussion, and the steam that
snored from his nose blew birds into bits and made great lumps of cloud
fall out of the sky.

He again caught up on Cael, who was running with his head down and his
toes up.

“If you won’t try to run, my treasure,” said the Carl, “you will never
get your tribute.”

And with that he incensed and exploded himself into an eye-blinding,
continuous, waggle and complexity of boots that left Cael behind him in
a flash.

“I will run until I burst,” sobbed Cael, and he screwed agitation and
despair into his legs until he hummed and buzzed like a blue-bottle on a
window.

Five miles from Ben Edair the Carl stopped, for he had again come among
blackberries.

He ate of these until he was no more than a sack of juice, and when
he heard the humming and buzzing of Cael of the Iron he mourned and
lamented that he could not wait to eat his fill He took off his coat,
stuffed it full of blackberries, swung it on his shoulders, and went
bounding stoutly and nimbly for Ben Edair.



CHAPTER VI

It would be hard to tell of the terror that was in Fionn’s breast and
in the hearts of the Fianna while they attended the conclusion of that
race.

They discussed it unendingly, and at some moment of the day a man
upbraided Fionn because he had not found Caelte the son of Rona’n as had
been agreed on.

“There is no one can run like Caelte,” one man averred.

“He covers the ground,” said another.

“He is light as a feather.”

“Swift as a stag.” “Lunged like a bull.”

“Legged like a wolf.”

“He runs!”

These things were said to Fionn, and Fionn said these things to himself.

With every passing minute a drop of lead thumped down into every heart,
and a pang of despair stabbed up to every brain.

“Go,” said Fionn to a hawk-eyed man, “go to the top of this hill and
watch for the coming of the racers.”

And he sent lithe men with him so that they might run back in endless
succession with the news.

The messengers began to run through his tent at minute intervals calling
“nothing,” “nothing,” “nothing,” as they paused and darted away.

And the words, “nothing, nothing, nothing,” began to drowse into the
brains of every person present.

“What can we hope from that Carl?” a champion demanded savagely.

“Nothing,” cried a messenger who stood and sped.

“A clump!” cried a champion.

“A hog!” said another.

“A flat-footed.”

“Little-wlnded.”

“Big-bellied.”

“Lazy-boned.”

“Pork!”

“Did you think, Fionn, that a whale could swim on land, or what did you
imagine that lump could do?”

“Nothing,” cried a messenger, and was sped as he spoke.

Rage began to gnaw in Fionn’s soul, and a red haze danced and flickered
before his eyes. His hands began to twitch and a desire crept over him
to seize on champions by the neck, and to shake and worry and rage among
them like a wild dog raging among sheep.

He looked on one, and yet he seemed to look on all at once.

“Be silent,” he growled. “Let each man be silent as a dead man.”

And he sat forward, seeing all, seeing none, with his mouth drooping
open, and such a wildness and bristle lowering from that great glum brow
that the champions shivered as though already in the chill of death, and
were silent.

He rose and stalked to the tent-door.

“Where to, O Fionn?” said a champion humbly.

“To the hill-top,” said Fionn, and he stalked on.

They followed him, whispering among themselves, keeping their eyes on
the ground as they climbed.



CHAPTER VII

“What do you see?” Fionn demanded of the watcher.

“Nothing,” that man replied.

“Look again,” said Fionn.

The eagle-eyed man lifted a face, thin and sharp as though it had been
carven on the wind, and he stared forward with an immobile intentness.

“What do you see?” said Fionn.

“Nothing,” the man replied.

“I will look myself,” said Fionn, and his great brow bent forward and
gloomed afar.

The watcher stood beside, staring with his tense face and unwinking,
lidless eye.

“What can you see, O Fionn?” said the watcher.

“I can see nothing,” said Fionn, and he projected again his grim, gaunt
forehead. For it seemed as if the watcher stared with his whole face,
aye, and with his hands; but Fionn brooded weightedly on distance with
his puckered and crannied brow.

They looked again.

“What can you see?” said Fionn.

“I see nothing,” said the watcher.

“I do not know if I see or if I surmise, but something moves,” said
Fionn. “There is a trample,” he said.

The watcher became then an eye, a rigidity, an intense out-thrusting and
ransacking of thin-spun distance. At last he spoke.

“There is a dust,” he said.

And at that the champions gazed also, straining hungrily afar, until
their eyes became filled with a blue darkness and they could no longer
see even the things that were close to them.

“I,” cried Cona’n triumphantly, “I see a dust.”

“And I,” cried another.

“And I.”

“I see a man,” said the eagle-eyed watcher.

And again they stared, until their straining eyes grew dim with tears
and winks, and they saw trees that stood up and sat down, and fields
that wobbled and spun round and round in a giddily swirling world.

“There is a man,” Cona’n roared.


“A man there is,” cried another.

“And he is carrying a man on his back,” said the watcher.

“It is Cael of the Iron carrying the Carl on his back,” he groaned.

“The great pork!” a man gritted.

“The no-good!” sobbed another.

“The lean-hearted.”

“Thick-thighed.”

“Ramshackle.”

“Muddle-headed.”

“Hog!” screamed a champion.

And he beat his fists angrily against a tree.

But the eagle-eyed watcher watched until his eyes narrowed and became
pin-points, and he ceased to be a man and became an optic.

“Wait,” he breathed, “wait until I screw into one other inch of sight.”

And they waited, looking no longer on that scarcely perceptible speck in
the distance, but straining upon the eye of the watcher as though they
would penetrate it and look through it.

“It is the Carl,” he said, “carrying something on his back, and behind
him again there is a dust.”

“Are you sure?” said Fionn in a voice that rumbled and vibrated like
thunder.

“It is the Carl,” said the watcher, “and the dust behind him is Cael of
the Iron trying to catch him up.”

Then the Fianna gave a roar of exultation, and each man seized his
neighbour and kissed him on both cheeks; and they gripped hands about
Fionn, and they danced round and round in a great circle, roaring with
laughter and relief, in the ecstasy which only comes where grisly fear
has been and whence that bony jowl has taken itself away.



CHAPTER VIII

The Carl of the Drab Coat came bumping and stumping and clumping into
the camp, and was surrounded by a multitude that adored him and hailed
him with tears.

“Meal!” he bawled, “meal for the love of the stars!”

And he bawled, “Meal, meal!” until he bawled everybody into silence.

Fionn addressed him.

“What for the meal, dear heart?”

“For the inside of my mouth,” said the Carl, “for the recesses and
crannies and deep-down profundities of my stomach. Meal, meal!” he
lamented.

Meal was brought.

The Carl put his coat on the ground, opened it carefully, and revealed
a store of blackberries, squashed, crushed, mangled, democratic,
ill-looking.

“The meal!” he groaned, “the meal!”

It was given to him.

“What of the race, my pulse?” said Fionn.

“Wait, wait,” cried the Carl. “I die, I die for meal and blackberries.”

Into the centre of the mess of blackberries he discharged a barrel of
meal, and be mixed the two up and through, and round and down, until
the pile of white-black, red-brown slibber-slobber reached up to his
shoulders. Then he commenced to paw and impel and project and cram the
mixture into his mouth, and between each mouthful he sighed a contented
sigh, and during every mouthful he gurgled an oozy gurgle.

But while Fionn and the Fianna stared like lost minds upon the Carl,
there came a sound of buzzing, as if a hornet or a queen of the wasps or
a savage, steep-winged griffin was hovering about them, and looking away
they saw Cael of the Iron charging on them with a monstrous extension
and scurry of his legs. He had a sword in his hand, and there was
nothing in his face but redness and ferocity.

Fear fell llke night around the Fianna, and they stood with slack knees
and hanging hands waiting for death. But the Carl lifted a pawful of his
oozy slop and discharged this at Cael with such a smash that the man’s
head spun off his shoulders and hopped along the ground. The Carl then
picked up the head and threw it at the body with such aim and force
that the neck part of the head jammed into the neck part of the body and
stuck there, as good a head as ever, you would have said, but that it
bad got twisted the wrong way round. The Carl then lashed his opponent
hand and foot.

“Now, dear heart, do you still claim tribute and lordship of Ireland?”
 said he.

“Let me go home,” groaned Cael, “I want to go home.”

“Swear by the sun and moon, if I let you go home, that you will send to
Fionn, yearly and every year, the rent of the land of Thessaly.”

“I swear that,” said Cael, “and I would swear anything to get home.”

The Carl lifted him then and put him sitting into his ship. Then he
raised his big boot and gave the boat a kick that drove it seven leagues
out into the sea, and that was how the adventure of Cael of the Iron
finished.

“Who are you, sir?” said Fionn to the Carl.

But before answering the Carl’s shape changed into one of splendour and
delight.

“I am ruler of the Shi’ of Rath Cruachan,” he said.

Then Fionn mac Uail made a feast and a banquet for the jovial god, and
with that the tale is ended of the King of Thessaly’s son and the Carl
of the Drab Coat.




THE ENCHANTED CAVE OF CESH CORRAN



CHAPTER I

Fionn mac Uail was the most prudent chief of an army in the world, but
he was not always prudent on his own account. Discipline sometimes
irked him, and he would then take any opportunity that presented for an
adventure; for he was not only a soldier, he was a poet also, that is, a
man of science, and whatever was strange or unusual had an irresistible
at-traction for him. Such a soldier was he that, single-handed, he could
take the Fianna out of any hole they got into, but such an inveterate
poet was he that all the Fianna together could scarcely retrieve him
from the abysses into which he tumbled. It took him to keep the Fianna
safe, but it took all the Fianna to keep their captain out of danger.
They did not complain of this, for they loved every hair of Fionn’s head
more than they loved their wives and children, and that was reasonable
for there was never in the world a person more worthy of love than Fionn
was.

Goll mac Morna did not admit so much in words, but he admitted it in
all his actions, for although he never lost an opportunity of killing
a member of Fionn’s family (there was deadly feud between clann-Baiscne
and clann-Morna), yet a call from Fionn brought Goll raging to his
assistance like a lion that rages tenderly by his mate. Not even a call
was necessary, for Goll felt in his heart when Fionn was threatened, and
he would leave Fionn’s own brother only half-killed to fly where his arm
was wanted. He was never thanked, of course, for although Fionn loved
Goll he did not like him, and that was how Goll felt towards Fionn.

Fionn, with Cona’n the Swearer and the dogs Bran and Sceo’lan, was
sitting on the hunting-mound at the top of Cesh Corran. Below and around
on every side the Fianna were beating the coverts in Legney and Brefny,
ranging the fastnesses of Glen Dallan, creeping in the nut and beech
forests of Carbury, spying among the woods of Kyle Conor, and ranging
the wide plain of Moy Conal.

The great captain was happy: his eyes were resting on the sights he
liked best--the sunlight of a clear day, the waving trees, the pure
sky, and the lovely movement of the earth; and his ears were filled with
delectable sounds--the baying of eager dogs, the clear calling of young
men, the shrill whistling that came from every side, and each sound of
which told a definite thing about the hunt. There was also the plunge
and scurry of the deer, the yapping of badgers, and the whirr of birds
driven into reluctant flight.



CHAPTER II

Now the king of the Shi’ of Cesh Corran, Conaran, son of Imidel, was
also watching the hunt, but Fionn did not see him, for we cannot see the
people of Faery until we enter their realm, and Fionn was not thinking
of Faery at that moment. Conaran did not like Fionn, and, seeing that
the great champion was alone, save for Cona’n and the two hounds Bran
and Sceo’lan, he thought the time had come to get Fionn into his power.
We do not know what Fionn had done to Conaran, but it must have been bad
enough, for the king of the Shi’ of Cesh Cotran was filled with joy
at the sight of Fionn thus close to him, thus unprotected, thus
unsuspicious.

This Conaran had four daughters. He was fond of them and proud of them,
but if one were to search the Shi’s of Ireland or the land of Ireland,
the equal of these four would not be found for ugliness and bad humour
and twisted temperaments.

Their hair was black as ink and tough as wire: it stuck up and poked out
and hung down about their heads in bushes and spikes and tangles. Their
eyes were bleary and red. Their mouths were black and twisted, and in
each of these mouths there was a hedge of curved yellow fangs. They had
long scraggy necks that could turn all the way round like the neck of
a hen. Their arms were long and skinny and muscular, and at the end of
each finger they had a spiked nail that was as hard as horn and as sharp
as a briar. Their bodies were covered with a bristle of hair and fur
and fluff, so that they looked like dogs in some parts and like cats
in others, and in other parts again they looked like chickens. They had
moustaches poking under their noses and woolly wads growing out of their
ears, so that when you looked at them the first time you never wanted
to look at them again, and if you had to look at them a second time you
were likely to die of the sight.

They were called Caevo’g, Cuillen, and Iaran. The fourth daughter,
Iarnach, was not present at that moment, so nothing need be said of her
yet.

Conaran called these three to him.

“Fionn is alone,” said he. “Fionn is alone, my treasures.”

“Ah!” said Caevo’g, and her jaw crunched upwards and stuck outwards, as
was usual with her when she was satisfied.

“When the chance comes take it,” Conaran continued, and he smiled a
black, beetle-browed, unbenevolent smile.

“It’s a good word,” quoth Cuillen, and she swung her jaw loose and made
it waggle up and down, for that was the way she smiled.

“And here is the chance,” her father added.

“The chance is here,” Iaran echoed, with a smile that was very like
her sister’s, only that it was worse, and the wen that grew on her nose
joggled to and fro and did not get its balance again for a long time.

Then they smiled a smile that was agreeable to their own eyes, but which
would have been a deadly thing for anybody else to see.

“But Fionn cannot see us,” Caevo’g objected, and her brow set downwards
and her chin set upwards and her mouth squeezed sidewards, so that her
face looked like a badly disappointed nut.

“And we are worth seeing,” Cuillen continued, and the disappointment
that was set in her sister’s face got carved and twisted into hers, but
it was worse in her case.

“That is the truth,” said Iaran in a voice of lamentation, and her face
took on a gnarl and a writhe and a solidity of ugly woe that beat the
other two and made even her father marvel.

“He cannot see us now,” Conaran replied, “but he will see us in a
minute.”

“Won’t Fionn be glad when he sees us!” said the three sisters.

And then they joined hands and danced joyfully around their father, and
they sang a song, the first line of which is:

      “Fionn thinks he is safe. But who knows when the sky will
   fall?”

Lots of the people in the Shi’ learned that song by heart, and they
applied it to every kind of circumstance.



CHAPTER III

BY his arts Conaran changed the sight of Fionn’s eyes, and he did the
same for Cona’n.

In a few minutes Fionn stood up from his place on the mound. Everything
was about him as before, and he did not know that he had gone into
Faery. He walked for a minute up and down the hillock. Then, as by
chance, he stepped down the sloping end of the mound and stood with his
mouth open, staring. He cried out:

“Come down here, Cona’n, my darling.”

Cona’n stepped down to him.

“Am I dreaming?” Fionn demanded, and he stretched out his finger before
him.

“If you are dreaming,” said Congn, “I’m dreaming too. They weren’t here
a minute ago,” he stammered.

Fionn looked up at the sky and found that it was still there. He stared
to one side and saw the trees of Kyle Conor waving in the distance. He
bent his ear to the wind and heard the shouting of hunters, the yapping
of dogs, and the clear whistles, which told how the hunt was going.

“Well!” said Fionn to himself.

“By my hand!” quoth Cona’n to his own soul.

And the two men stared into the hillside as though what they were
looking at was too wonderful to be looked away from.

“Who are they?” said Fionn.

“What are they?” Cona’n gasped. And they stared again.

For there was a great hole like a doorway in the side of the mound, and
in that doorway the daughters of Conaran sat spinning. They had three
crooked sticks of holly set up before the cave, and they were reeling
yarn off these. But it was enchantment they were weaving.

“One could not call them handsome,” said Cona’n.

“One could,” Fionn replied, “but it would not be true.”

“I cannot see them properly,” Fionn complained. “They are hiding behind
the holly.”

“I would be contented if I could not see them at all,” his companion
grumbled.

But the Chief insisted.

“I want to make sure that it is whiskers they are wearing.”

“Let them wear whiskers or not wear them,” Cona’n counselled. “But let
us have nothing to do with them.”

“One must not be frightened of anything,” Fionn stated.

“I am not frightened,” Cona’n explained. “I only want to keep my good
opinion of women, and if the three yonder are women, then I feel sure I
shall begin to dislike females from this minute out.”

“Come on, my love,” said Fionn, “for I must find out if these whiskers
are true.”

He strode resolutely into the cave. He pushed the branches of holly
aside and marched up to Conaran’s daughters, with Cona’n behind him.



CHAPTER IV

The instant they passed the holly a strange weakness came over the
heroes. Their fists seemed to grow heavy as lead, and went dingle-dangle
at the ends of their arms; their legs became as light as straws and
began to bend in and out; their necks became too delicate to hold
anything up, so that their heads wibbled and wobbled from side to side.

“What’s wrong at all?” said Cona’n, as he tumbled to the ground.

“Everything is,” Fionn replied, and he tumbled beside him.

The three sisters then tied the heroes with every kind of loop and twist
and knot that could be thought of.

“Those are whiskers!” said Fionn.

“Alas!” said Conan.

“What a place you must hunt whiskers in?” he mumbled savagely. “Who
wants whiskers?” he groaned.

But Fionn was thinking of other things.

“If there was any way of warning the Fianna not to come here,” Fionn
murmured.

“There is no way, my darling,” said Caevo’g, and she smiled a smile that
would have killed Fionn, only that he shut his eyes in time.

After a moment he murmured again:

“Cona’n, my dear love, give the warning whistle so that the Fianna will
keep out of this place.”

A little whoof, like the sound that would be made by a baby and it
asleep, came from Cona’n.

“Fionn,” said he, “there isn’t a whistle in me. We are done for,” said
he.

“You are done for, indeed,” said Cuillen, and she smiled a hairy and
twisty and fangy smile that almost finished Cona’n.

By that time some of the Fianna had returned to the mound to see why
Bran and Sceo’lan were barking so outrageously. They saw the cave and
went into it, but no sooner had they passed the holly branches than
their strength went from them, and they were seized and bound by the
vicious hags. Little by little all the members of the Fianna returned to
the hill, and each of them was drawn into the cave, and each was bound
by the sisters.

Oisi’n and Oscar and mac Lugac came, with the nobles of clann-Baiscne,
and with those of clann-Corcoran and clann-Smo’l; they all came, and
they were all bound.

It was a wonderful sight and a great deed this binding of the Fianna,
and the three sisters laughed with a joy that was terrible to hear and
was almost death to see. As the men were captured they were carried by
the hags into dark mysterious holes and black perplexing labyrinths.

“Here is another one,” cried Caevo’g as she bundled a trussed champion
along.

“This one is fat,” said Cuillen, and she rolled a bulky Fenian along
like a wheel.

“Here,” said Iaran, “is a love of a man. One could eat this kind of
man,” she murmured, and she licked a lip that had whiskers growing
inside as well as out.

And the corded champion whimpered in her arms, for he did not know
but eating might indeed be his fate, and he would have preferred to be
coffined anywhere in the world rather than to be coffined inside of that
face. So far for them.



CHAPTER V

Within the cave there was silence except for the voices of the hags and
the scarcely audible moaning of the Fianna-Finn, but without there was
a dreadful uproar, for as each man returned from the chase his dogs came
with him, and although the men went into the cave the dogs did not.

They were too wise.

They stood outside, filled with savagery and terror, for they could
scent their masters and their masters’ danger, and perhaps they could
get from the cave smells till then unknown and full of alarm.

From the troop of dogs there arose a baying and barking, a snarling and
howling and growling, a yelping and squealing and bawling for which no
words can be found. Now and again a dog nosed among a thousand smells
and scented his master; the ruff of his neck stood up like a hog’s
bristles and a netty ridge prickled along his spine. Then with red eyes,
with bared fangs, with a hoarse, deep snort and growl he rushed at the
cave, and then he halted and sneaked back again with all his ruffles
smoothed, his tail between his legs, his eyes screwed sideways in
miserable apology and alarm, and a long thin whine of woe dribbling out
of his nose.

The three sisters took their wide-channelled, hard-tempered swords in
their hands, and prepared to slay the Fianna, but before doing so they
gave one more look from the door of the cave to see if there might be a
straggler of the Fianna who was escaping death by straggling, and they
saw one coming towards them with Bran and Sceo’lan leaping beside him,
while all the other dogs began to burst their throats with barks and
split their noses with snorts and wag their tails off at sight of the
tall, valiant, white-toothed champion, Goll mor mac Morna. “We will kill
that one first,” said Caevo’g.

“There is only one of him,” said Cuillen.

“And each of us three is the match for an hundred,” said Iaran.

The uncanny, misbehaved, and outrageous harridans advanced then to meet
the son of Morna, and when he saw these three Goll whipped the sword
from his thigh, swung his buckler round, and got to them in ten great
leaps.

Silence fell on the world during that conflict. The wind went down; the
clouds stood still; the old hill itself held its breath; the warriors
within ceased to be men and became each an ear; and the dogs sat in
a vast circle round the combatants, with their heads all to one side,
their noses poked forward, their mouths half open, and their tails
forgotten. Now and again a dog whined in a whisper and snapped a
little snap on the air, but except for that there was neither sound nor
movement.

It was a long fight. It was a hard and a tricky fight, and Goll won it
by bravery and strategy and great good luck; for with one shrewd slice
of his blade he carved two of these mighty termagants into equal halves,
so that there were noses and whiskers to his right hand and knees and
toes to his left: and that stroke was known afterwards as one of the
three great sword-strokes of Ireland. The third hag, however, had
managed to get behind Goll, and she leaped on to his back with the bound
of a panther, and hung here with the skilful, many-legged, tight-twisted
clutching of a spider. But the great champion gave a twist of his hips
and a swing of his shoulders that whirled her around him like a sack.
He got her on the ground and tied her hands with the straps of a shield,
and he was going to give her the last blow when she appealed to his
honour and bravery.

“I put my life under your protection,” said she. “And if you let me go
free I will lift the enchantment from the Fianna-Finn and will give them
all back to you again.”

“I agree to that,” said Goll, and he untied her straps. The harridan did
as she had promised, and in a short time Fionn and Oisi’n and Oscar and
Cona’n were released, and after that all the Fianna were released.



CHAPTER VI

As each man came out of the cave he gave a jump and a shout; the courage
of the world went into him and he felt that he could fight twenty. But
while they were talking over the adventure and explaining how it had
happened, a vast figure strode over the side of the hill and descended
among them. It was Conaran’s fourth daughter.

If the other three had been terrible to look on, this one was more
terrible than the three together. She was clad in iron plate, and she
had a wicked sword by her side and a knobby club in her hand She halted
by the bodies of her sisters, and bitter tears streamed down into her
beard.

“Alas, my sweet ones,” said she, “I am too late.”

And then she stared fiercely at Fionn.

“I demand a combat,” she roared.

“It is your right,” said Fionn. He turned to his son.

“Oisi’n, my heart, kill me this honourable hag.” But for the only time
in his life Oisi’n shrank from a combat.

“I cannot do it,” he said, “I feel too weak.”

Fionn was astounded. “Oscar,” he said, “will you kill me this great
hag?”

Oscar stammered miserably. “I would not be able to,” he said.

Cona’n also refused, and so did Caelte mac Rona’n and mac Lugac, for
there was no man there but was terrified by the sight of that mighty and
valiant harridan.

Fionn rose to his feet. “I will take this combat myself,” he said
sternly.

And he swung his buckler forward and stretched his right hand to the
sword. But at that terrible sight Goll mae Morna blushed deeply and
leaped from the ground.

“No, no,” he cried; “no, my soul, Fionn, this would not be a proper
combat for you. I take this fight.”

“You have done your share, Goll,” said the captain.

“I should finish the fight I began,” Goll continued, “for it was I who
killed the two sisters of this valiant hag, and it is against me the
feud lies.”

“That will do for me,” said the horrible daughter of Conaran. “I will
kill Goll mor mac Morna first, and after that I will kill Fionn, and
after that I will kill every Fenian of the Fianna-Finn.”

“You may begin, Goll,” said Fionn, “and I give you my blessing.”

Goll then strode forward to the fight, and the hag moved against him
with equal alacrity. In a moment the heavens rang to the clash of swords
on bucklers. It was hard to with-stand the terrific blows of that mighty
female, for her sword played with the quickness of lightning and smote
like the heavy crashing of a storm. But into that din and encirclement
Goll pressed and ventured, steady as a rock in water, agile as a
creature of the sea, and when one of the combatants retreated it was
the hag that gave backwards. As her foot moved a great shout of joy rose
from the Fianna. A snarl went over the huge face of the monster and
she leaped forward again, but she met Goll’s point in the road; it went
through her, and in another moment Goll took her head from its shoulders
and swung it on high before Fionn.

As the Fianna turned homewards Fionn spoke to his great champion and
enemy.

“Goll,” he said, “I have a daughter.”

“A lovely girl, a blossom of the dawn,” said Goll.

“Would she please you as a wife?” the chief demanded.

“She would please me,” said Goll.

“She is your wife,” said Fionn.


But that did not prevent Goll from killing Fionn’s brother Cairell later
on, nor did it prevent Fionn from killing Goll later on again, and
the last did not prevent Goll from rescuing Fionn out of hell when the
Fianna-Finn were sent there under the new God. Nor is there any reason
to complain or to be astonished at these things, for it is a mutual
world we llve in, a give-and-take world, and there is no great harm in
it.




BECUMA OF THE WHITE SKIN



CHAPTER I

There are more worlds than one, and in many ways they are unlike each
other. But joy and sorrow, or, in other words, good and evil, are not
absent in their degree from any of the worlds, for wherever there is
life there is action, and action is but the expression of one or other
of these qualities.

After this Earth there is the world of the Shi’. Beyond it again lies
the Many-Coloured Land. Next comes the Land of Wonder, and after that
the Land of Promise awaits us. You will cross clay to get into the Shi’;
you will cross water to attain the Many-Coloured Land; fire must be
passed ere the Land of Wonder is attained, but we do not know what will
be crossed for the fourth world.

This adventure of Conn the Hundred Fighter and his son Art was by the
way of water, and therefore he was more advanced in magic than Fionn
was, all of whose adventures were by the path of clay and into Faery
only, but Conn was the High King and so the arch-magician of Ireland.

A council had been called in the Many-Coloured Land to discuss the case
of a lady named Becuma Cneisgel, that is, Becuma of the White Skin, the
daughter of Eogan Inver. She had run away from her husband Labraid and
had taken refuge with Gadiar, one of the sons of Mananna’n mac Lir, the
god of the sea, and the ruler, therefore, of that sphere.

It seems, then, that there is marriage in two other spheres. In the
Shi’ matrimony is recorded as being parallel in every respect with
earth-marriage, and the desire which urges to it seems to be as violent
and inconstant as it is with us; but in the Many-Coloured Land marriage
is but a contemplation of beauty, a brooding and meditation wherein all
grosser desire is unknown and children are born to sinless parents.

In the Shi’ the crime of Becuma would have been lightly considered, and
would have received none or but a nominal punishment, but in the second
world a horrid gravity attaches to such a lapse, and the retribution
meted is implacable and grim. It may be dissolution by fire, and that
can note a destruction too final for the mind to contemplate; or it may
be banishment from that sphere to a lower and worse one.

This was the fate of Becuma of the White Skin.

One may wonder how, having attained to that sphere, she could have
carried with her so strong a memory of the earth. It is certain that she
was not a fit person to exist in the Many-Coloured Land, and it is to be
feared that she was organised too grossly even for life in the Shi’.

She was an earth-woman, and she was banished to the earth.

Word was sent to the Shi’s of Ireland that this lady should not be
permitted to enter any of them; from which it would seem that the
ordinances of the Shi come from the higher world, and, it might follow,
that the conduct of earth lies in the Shi’.

In that way, the gates of her own world and the innumerable doors of
Faery being closed against her, Becuma was forced to appear in the world
of men.

It is pleasant, however, notwithstanding her terrible crime and her
woeful punishment, to think how courageous she was. When she was told
her sentence, nay, her doom, she made no outcry, nor did she waste any
time in sorrow. She went home and put on her nicest clothes.

She wore a red satin smock, and, over this, a cloak of green silk out of
which long fringes of gold swung and sparkled, and she had light sandals
of white bronze on her thin, shapely feet. She had long soft hair that
was yellow as gold, and soft as the curling foam of the sea. Her eyes
were wide and clear as water and were grey as a dove’s breast. Her teeth
were white as snow and of an evenness to marvel at. Her lips were thin
and beautifully curved: red lips in truth, red as winter berries and
tempting as the fruits of summer. The people who superintended her
departure said mournfully that when she was gone there would be no more
beauty left in their world.

She stepped into a coracle, it was pushed on the enchanted waters, and
it went forward, world within world, until land appeared, and her boat
swung in low tide against a rock at the foot of Ben Edair.

So far for her.



CHAPTER II

Conn the Hundred Fighter, Ard-Ri’ of Ireland, was in the lowest spirits
that can be imagined, for his wife was dead. He had been Ard-Ri for nine
years, and during his term the corn used to be reaped three times in
each year, and there was full and plenty of everything. There are few
kings who can boast of more kingly results than he can, but there was
sore trouble in store for him.

He had been married to Eithne, the daughter of Brisland Binn, King of
Norway, and, next to his subjects, he loved his wife more than all that
was lovable in the world. But the term of man and woman, of king or
queen, is set in the stars, and there is no escaping Doom for any one;
so, when her time came, Eithne died.

Now there were three great burying-places in Ireland--the Brugh of the
Boyne in Ulster, over which Angus Og is chief and god; the Shi’ mound
of Cruachan Ahi, where Ethal Anbual presides over the underworld of
Connacht, and Tailltin, in Royal Meath. It was in this last, the sacred
place of his own lordship, that Conn laid his wife to rest.

Her funeral games were played during nine days. Her keen was sung by
poets and harpers, and a cairn ten acres wide was heaved over her clay.
Then the keening ceased and the games drew to an end; the princes of the
Five Prov-inces returned by horse or by chariot to their own places;
the concourse of mourners melted away, and there was nothing left by
the great cairn but the sun that dozed upon it in the daytime, the heavy
clouds that brooded on it in the night, and the desolate, memoried king.

For the dead queen had been so lovely that Conn could not forget her;
she had been so kind at every moment that he could not but miss her at
every moment; but it was in the Council Chamber and the Judgement
Hall that he most pondered her memory. For she had also been wise, and
lack-ing her guidance, all grave affairs seemed graver, shadowing each
day and going with him to the pillow at night.

The trouble of the king becomes the trouble of the subject, for how
shall we live if judgement is withheld, or if faulty decisions are
promulgated? Therefore, with the sorrow of the king, all Ireland was in
grief, and it was the wish of every person that he should marry again.

Such an idea, however, did not occur to him, for he could not conceive
how any woman should fill the place his queen had vacated. He grew more
and more despondent, and less and less fitted to cope with affairs of
state, and one day he instructed his son Art to take the rule during his
absence, and he set out for Ben Edair.

For a great wish had come upon him to walk beside the sea; to listen
to the roll and boom of long, grey breakers; to gaze on an unfruitful,
desolate wilderness of waters; and to forget in those sights all that
he could forget, and if he could not forget then to remember all that he
should remember.

He was thus gazing and brooding when one day he observed a coracle
drawing to the shore. A young girl stepped from it and walked to him
among black boulders and patches of yellow sand.



CHAPTER III

Being a king he had authority to ask questions. Conn asked her,
therefore, all the questions that he could think of, for it is not every
day that a lady drives from the sea, and she wearing a golden-fringed
cloak of green silk through which a red satin smock peeped at the
openings. She replied to his questions, but she did not tell him all the
truth; for, indeed, she could not afford to.

She knew who he was, for she retained some of the powers proper to the
worlds she had left, and as he looked on her soft yellow hair and on her
thin red lips, Conn recognised, as all men do, that one who is lovely
must also be good, and so he did not frame any inquiry on that count;
for everything is forgotten in the presence of a pretty woman, and a
magician can be bewitched also.

She told Conn that the fame of his son Art had reached even the
Many-Coloured Land, and that she had fallen in love with the boy. This
did not seem unreasonable to one who had himself ventured much in Faery,
and who had known so many of the people of that world leave their own
land for the love of a mortal.

“What is your name, my sweet lady?” said the king.

“I am called Delvcaem (Fair Shape) and I am the daughter of Morgan,” she
replied.

“I have heard much of Morgan,” said the king. “He is a very great
magician.”

During this conversation Conn had been regarding her with the minute
freedom which is right only in a king. At what precise instant he forgot
his dead consort we do not know, but it is certain that at this moment
his mind was no longer burdened with that dear and lovely memory. His
voice was melancholy when he spoke again.

“You love my son!”

“Who could avoid loving him?” she murmured.

“When a woman speaks to a man about the love she feels for another man
she is not liked. And,” he continued, “when she speaks to a man who has
no wife of his own about her love for another man then she is disliked.”

“I would not be disliked by you,” Becuma murmured.

“Nevertheless,” said he regally, “I will not come between a woman and
her choice.”

“I did not know you lacked a wife,” said Becuma, but indeed she did.

“You know it now,” the king replied sternly.

“What shall I do?” she inquired, “am I to wed you or your son?”

“You must choose,” Conn answered.

“If you allow me to choose it means that you do not want me very badly,”
 said she with a smile.

“Then I will not allow you to choose,” cried the king, “and it is with
myself you shall marry.”

He took her hand in his and kissed it.

“Lovely is this pale thin hand. Lovely is the slender foot that I see in
a small bronze shoe,” said the king.

After a suitable time she continued:

“I should not like your son to be at Tara when I am there, or for a year
afterwards, for I do not wish to meet him until I have forgotten him and
have come to know you well.”

“I do not wish to banish my son,” the king protested.

“It would not really be a banishment,” she said. “A prince’s duty could
be set him, and in such an absence he would improve his knowledge both
of Ireland and of men. Further,” she continued with downcast eyes,
“when you remember the reason that brought me here you will see that his
presence would be an embarrassment to us both, and my presence would be
unpleasant to him if he remembers his mother.”

“Nevertheless,” said Conn stubbornly, “I do not wish to banish my son;
it is awkward and unnecessary.”

“For a year only,” she pleaded.

“It is yet,” he continued thoughtfully, “a reasonable reason that you
give and I will do what you ask, but by my hand and word I don’t like
doing it.”

They set out then briskly and joyfully on the homeward journey, and in
due time they reached Tara of the Kings.



CHAPTER IV

It is part of the education of a prince to be a good chess player, and
to continually exercise his mind in view of the judgements that he will
be called upon to give and the knotty, tortuous, and perplexing matters
which will obscure the issues which he must judge. Art, the son of Conn,
was sitting at chess with Cromdes, his father’s magician.

“Be very careful about the move you are going to make,” said Cromdes.

“CAN I be careful?” Art inquired. “Is the move that you are thinking of
in my power?”

“It is not,” the other admitted.

“Then I need not be more careful than usual,” Art replied, and he made
his move.

“It is a move of banishment,” said Cromdes.

“As I will not banish myself, I suppose my father will do it, but I do
not know why he should.”

“Your father will not banish you.”

“Who then?” “Your mother.”

“My mother is dead.”

“You have a new one,” said the magician.

“Here is news,” said Art. “I think I shall not love my new mother.”

“You will yet love her better than she loves you,” said Cromdes, meaning
thereby that they would hate each other.

While they spoke the king and Becuma entered the palace.

“I had better go to greet my father,” said the young man.

“You had better wait until he sends for you,” his companion advised, and
they returned to their game.

In due time a messenger came from the king directing Art to leave Tara
instantly, and to leave Ireland for one full year.

He left Tara that night, and for the space of a year he was not seen
again in Ireland. But during that period things did not go well with the
king nor with Ireland. Every year before that time three crops of corn
used to be lifted off the land, but during Art’s absence there was no
corn in Ireland and there was no milk. The whole land went hungry.

Lean people were in every house, lean cattle in every field; the bushes
did not swing out their timely berries or seasonable nuts; the bees went
abroad as busily as ever, but each night they returned languidly, with
empty pouches, and there was no honey in their hives when the honey
season came. People began to look at each other questioningly,
meaningly, and dark remarks passed between them, for they knew that a
bad harvest means, somehow, a bad king, and, although this belief can be
combated, it is too firmly rooted in wisdom to be dismissed.

The poets and magicians met to consider why this disaster should have
befallen the country and by their arts they discovered the truth about
the king’s wife, and that she was Becuma of the White Skin, and they
discovered also the cause of her banishment from the Many-Coloured Land
that is beyond the sea, which is beyond even the grave.

They told the truth to the king, but he could not bear to be parted from
that slender-handed, gold-haired, thin-lipped, blithe enchantress, and
he required them to discover some means whereby he might retain his wife
and his crown. There was a way and the magicians told him of it.

“If the son of a sinless couple can be found and if his blood be mixed
with the soll of Tara the blight and ruin will depart from Ireland,”
 said the magicians.

“If there is such a boy I will find him,” cried the Hundred Fighter.

At the end of a year Art returned to Tara. His father delivered to him
the sceptre of Ireland, and he set out on a journey to find the son of a
sinless couple such as he had been told of.



CHAPTER V

The High King did not know where exactly he should look for such a
saviour, but he was well educated and knew how to look for whatever was
lacking. This knowledge will be useful to those upon whom a similar duty
should ever devolve.

He went to Ben Edair. He stepped into a coracle and pushed out to the
deep, and he permitted the coracle to go as the winds and the waves
directed it.

In such a way he voyaged among the small islands of the sea until he
lost all knowledge of his course and was adrift far out in ocean. He was
under the guidance of the stars and the great luminaries.

He saw black seals that stared and barked and dived dancingly, with the
round turn of a bow and the forward onset of an arrow. Great whales came
heaving from the green-hued void, blowing a wave of the sea high
into the air from their noses and smacking their wide flat tails
thunder-ously on the water. Porpoises went snorting past in bands and
clans. Small fish came sliding and flickering, and all the outlandish
creatures of the deep rose by his bobbing craft and swirled and sped
away.

Wild storms howled by him so that the boat climbed painfully to the sky
on a mile-high wave, balanced for a tense moment on its level top, and
sped down the glassy side as a stone goes furiously from a sling.

Or, again, caught in the chop of a broken sea, it stayed shuddering and
backing, while above his head there was only a low sad sky, and around
him the lap and wash of grey waves that were never the same and were
never different.

After long staring on the hungry nothingness of air and water he would
stare on the skin-stretched fabric of his boat as on a strangeness, or
he would examine his hands and the texture of his skin and the stiff
black hairs that grew behind his knuckles and sprouted around his ring,
and he found in these things newness and wonder.

Then, when days of storm had passed, the low grey clouds shivered and
cracked in a thousand places, each grim islet went scudding to the
horizon as though terrified by some great breadth, and when they had
passed he stared into vast after vast of blue infinity, in the depths
of which his eyes stayed and could not pierce, and wherefrom they could
scarcely be withdrawn. A sun beamed thence that filled the air with
sparkle and the sea with a thousand lights, and looking on these he was
reminded of his home at Tara: of the columns of white and yellow bronze
that blazed out sunnily on the sun, and the red and white and yellow
painted roofs that beamed at and astonished the eye.

Sailing thus, lost in a succession of days and nights, of winds and
calms, he came at last to an island.

His back was turned to it, and long before he saw it he smelled it and
wondered; for he had been sitting as in a daze, musing on a change that
had seemed to come in his changeless world; and for a long time he could
not tell what that was which made a difference on the salt-whipped wind
or why he should be excited. For suddenly he had become excited and his
heart leaped in violent expectation.

“It is an October smell,” he said.

“It is apples that I smell.”

He turned then and saw the island, fragrant with apple trees, sweet with
wells of wine; and, hearkening towards the shore, his ears, dulled yet
with the unending rhythms of the sea, distinguished and were filled
with song; for the isle was, as it were, a nest of birds, and they sang
joyously, sweetly, triumphantly.

He landed on that lovely island, and went forward under the darting
birds, under the apple boughs, skirting fragrant lakes about which were
woods of the sacred hazel and into which the nuts of knowledge fell and
swam; and he blessed the gods of his people because of the ground that
did not shiver and because of the deeply rooted trees that could not gad
or budge.



CHAPTER VI

Having gone some distance by these pleasant ways he saw a shapely house
dozing in the sunlight.

It was thatched with the wings of birds, blue wings and yellow and white
wings, and in the centre of the house there was a door of crystal set in
posts of bronze.

The queen of this island lived there, Rigru (Large-eyed), the daughter
of Lodan, and wife of Daire Degamra. She was seated on a crystal
throne with her son Segda by her side, and they welcomed the High King
courteously.

There were no servants in this palace; nor was there need for them. The
High King found that his hands had washed themselves, and when later on
he noticed that food had been placed before him he noticed also that
it had come without the assistance of servile hands. A cloak was laid
gently about his shoulders, and he was glad of it, for his own was
soiled by exposure to sun and wind and water, and was not worthy of a
lady’s eye.

Then he was invited to eat.

He noticed, however, that food had been set for no one but himself, and
this did not please him, for to eat alone was contrary to the hospitable
usage of a king, and was contrary also to his contract with the gods.

“Good, my hosts,” he remonstrated, “it is geasa (taboo) for me to eat
alone.”

“But we never eat together,” the queen replied.

“I cannot violate my geasa,” said the High King.

“I will eat with you,” said Segda (Sweet Speech), “and thus, while you
are our guest you will not do violence to your vows.”

“Indeed,” said Conn, “that will be a great satisfaction, for I have
already all the trouble that I can cope with and have no wish to add to
it by offending the gods.”

“What is your trouble?” the gentle queen asked. “During a year,” Conn
replied, “there has been neither corn nor milk in Ireland. The land is
parched, the trees are withered, the birds do not sing in Ireland, and
the bees do not make honey.”

“You are certainly in trouble,” the queen assented.

“But,” she continued, “for what purpose have you come to our island?”

“I have come to ask for the loan of your son.”

“A loan of my son!”

“I have been informed,” Conn explained, “that if the son of a sinless
couple is brought to Tara and is bathed in the waters of Ireland the
land will be delivered from those ills.”

The king of this island, Daire, had not hitherto spoken, but he now did
so with astonishment and emphasis.

“We would not lend our son to any one, not even to gain the kingship of
the world,” said he.

But Segda, observing that the guest’s countenance was discomposed, broke
in:

“It is not kind to refuse a thing that the Ard-Ri’ of Ireland asks for,
and I will go with him.”

“Do not go, my pulse,” his father advised.

“Do not go, my one treasure,” his mother pleaded.

“I must go indeed,” the boy replied, “for it is to do good I am
required, and no person may shirk such a requirement.”

“Go then,” said his father, “but I will place you under the protection
of the High King and of the Four Provincial Kings of Ireland, and under
the protection of Art, the son of Conn, and of Fionn, the son of Uail,
and under the protection of the magicians and poets and the men of art
in Ireland.” And he thereupon bound these protections and safeguards on
the Ard-Ri’ with an oath.

“I will answer for these protections,” said Conn.

He departed then from the island with Segda and in three days they
reached Ireland, and in due time they arrived at Tara.



CHAPTER VII

On reaching the palace Conn called his magicians and poets to a council
and informed them that he had found the boy they sought--the son of a
virgin. These learned people consulted together, and they stated that
the young man must be killed, and that his blood should be mixed with
the earth of Tara and sprinkled under the withered trees.

When Segda heard this he was astonished and defiant; then, seeing that
he was alone and without prospect of succour, he grew downcast and was
in great fear for his life. But remembering the safeguards under which
he had been placed, he enumerated these to the assembly, and called on
the High King to grant him the protections that were his due.

Conn was greatly perturbed, but, as in duty bound, he placed the boy
under the various protections that were in his oath, and, with the
courage of one who has no more to gain or lose, he placed Segda,
furthermore, under the protection of all the men of Ireland.

But the men of Ireland refused to accept that bond, saying that although
the Ard-Ri’ was acting justly towards the boy he was not acting justly
towards Ireland.

“We do not wish to slay this prince for our pleasure,” they argued, “but
for the safety of Ireland he must be killed.”

Angry parties were formed. Art, and Fionn the son of Uail, and the
princes of the land were outraged at the idea that one who had been
placed under their protection should be hurt by any hand. But the men of
Ireland and the magicians stated that the king had gone to Faery for a
special purpose, and that his acts outside or contrary to that purpose
were illegal, and committed no person to obedience.

There were debates in the Council Hall, in the market-place, in the
streets of Tara, some holding that national honour dissolved and
absolved all personal honour, and others protesting that no man had
aught but his personal honour, and that above it not the gods, not even
Ireland, could be placed--for it is to be known that Ireland is a god.

Such a debate was in course, and Segda, to whom both sides addressed
gentle and courteous arguments, grew more and more disconsolate.

“You shall die for Ireland, dear heart,” said one of them, and he gave
Segda three kisses on each cheek.

“Indeed,” said Segda, returning those kisses, “indeed I had not
bargained to die for Ireland, but only to bathe in her waters and to
remove her pestilence.”

“But dear child and prince,” said another, kissing him likewise, “if any
one of us could save Ireland by dying for her how cheerfully we would
die.”

And Segda, returning his three kisses, agreed that the death was noble,
but that it was not in his undertaking.

Then, observing the stricken countenances about him, and the faces of
men and women hewn thin by hunger, his resolution melted away, and he
said:

“I think I must die for you,” and then he said:

“I will die for you.”

And when he had said that, all the people present touched his cheek with
their lips, and the love and peace of Ireland entered into his soul, so
that he was tranquil and proud and happy.

The executioner drew his wide, thin blade and all those present covered
their eyes with their cloaks, when a wailing voice called on the
executioner to delay yet a moment. The High King uncovered his eyes and
saw that a woman had approached driving a cow before her.

“Why are you killing the boy?” she demanded.

The reason for this slaying was explained to her.

“Are you sure,” she asked, “that the poets and magicians really know
everything?”

“Do they not?” the king inquired.

“Do they?” she insisted.

And then turning to the magicians:

“Let one magician of the magicians tell me what is hidden in the bags
that are lying across the back of my cow.”

But no magician could tell it, nor did they try to.

“Questions are not answered thus,” they said. “There is formulae, and
the calling up of spirits, and lengthy complicated preparations in our
art.”

“I am not badly learned in these arts,” said the woman, “and I say that
if you slay this cow the effect will be the same as if you had killed
the boy.”

“We would prefer to kill a cow or a thousand cows rather than harm this
young prince,” said Conn, “but if we spare the boy will these evils
return?”

“They will not be banished until you have banished their cause.”

“And what is their cause?”

“Becuma is the cause, and she must be banished.”

“If you must tell me what to do,” said Conn, “tell me at least to do
something that I can do.”

“I will tell you certainly. You can keep Becuma and your ills as long as
you want to. It does not matter to me. Come, my son,” she said to
Segda, for it was Segda’s mother who had come to save him; and then
that sinless queen and her son went back to their home of enchantment,
leaving the king and Fionn and the magicians and nobles of Ireland
astonished and ashamed.



CHAPTER VIII

There are good and evil people in this and in every other world, and the
person who goes hence will go to the good or the evil that is native
to him, while those who return come as surely to their due. The trouble
which had fallen on Becuma did not leave her repentant, and the sweet
lady began to do wrong as instantly and innocently as a flower begins
to grow. It was she who was responsible for the ills which had come on
Ireland, and we may wonder why she brought these plagues and droughts to
what was now her own country.

Under all wrong-doing lies personal vanity or the feeling that we are
endowed and privileged beyond our fellows. It is probable that, however
courageously she had accepted fate, Becuma had been sharply stricken in
her pride; in the sense of personal strength, aloofness, and identity,
in which the mind likens itself to god and will resist every domination
but its own. She had been punished, that is, she had submitted to
control, and her sense of freedom, of privilege, of very being, was
outraged. The mind flinches even from the control of natural law, and
how much more from the despotism of its own separated likenesses, for if
another can control me that other has usurped me, has become me, and how
terribly I seem diminished by the seeming addition!

This sense of separateness is vanity, and is the bed of all wrong-doing.
For we are not freedom, we are control, and we must submit to our own
function ere we can exercise it. Even unconsciously we accept the rights
of others to all that we have, and if we will not share our good with
them, it is because we cannot, having none; but we will yet give what
we have, although that be evil. To insist on other people sharing in
our personal torment is the first step towards insisting that they shall
share in our joy, as we shall insist when we get it.

Becuma considered that if she must suffer all else she met should suffer
also. She raged, therefore, against Ireland, and in particular she raged
against young Art, her husband’s son, and she left undone nothing that
could afflict Ireland or the prince. She may have felt that she could
not make them suffer, and that is a maddening thought to any woman. Or
perhaps she had really desired the son instead of the father, and her
thwarted desire had perpetuated itself as hate. But it is true that Art
regarded his mother’s successor with intense dislike, and it is true
that she actively returned it.

One day Becuma came on the lawn before the palace, and seeing that Art
was at chess with Cromdes she walked to the table on which the match was
being played and for some time regarded the game. But the young prince
did not take any notice of her while she stood by the board, for he knew
that this girl was the enemy of Ireland, and he could not bring himself
even to look at her.

Becuma, looking down on his beautiful head, smiled as much in rage as in
disdain.

“O son of a king,” said she, “I demand a game with you for stakes.”

Art then raised his head and stood up courteously, but he did not look
at her.

“Whatever the queen demands I will do,” said he.

“Am I not your mother also?” she replied mockingly, as she took the seat
which the chief magician leaped from.

The game was set then, and her play was so skilful that Art was hard put
to counter her moves. But at a point of the game Becuma grew thoughtful,
and, as by a lapse of memory, she made a move which gave the victory to
her opponent. But she had intended that. She sat then, biting on her lip
with her white small teeth and staring angrily at Art.

“What do you demand from me?” she asked.

“I bind you to eat no food in Ireland until you find the wand of Curoi,
son of Dare’.”

Becuma then put a cloak about her and she went from Tara northward and
eastward until she came to the dewy, sparkling Brugh of Angus mac an Og
in Ulster, but she was not admitted there. She went thence to the Shi’
ruled over by Eogabal, and although this lord would not admit her, his
daughter Aine’, who was her foster-sister, let her into Faery.

She made inquiries and was informed where the dun of Curoi mac Dare’
was, and when she had received this intelligence she set out for Sliev
Mis. By what arts she coaxed Curoi to give up his wand it matters not,
enough that she was able to return in triumph to Tara. When she handed
the wand to Art, she said:

“I claim my game of revenge.”

“It is due to you,” said Art, and they sat on the lawn before the palace
and played.

A hard game that was, and at times each of the combatants sat for an
hour staring on the board before the next move was made, and at times
they looked from the board and for hours stared on the sky seeking as
though in heaven for advice. But Becuma’s foster-sister, Aine’, came
from the Shi’, and, unseen by any, she interfered with Art’s play, so
that, suddenly, when he looked again on the board, his face went pale,
for he saw that the game was lost.

“I didn’t move that piece,” said he sternly.

“Nor did I,” Becuma replied, and she called on the onlookers to confirm
that statement.

She was smiling to herself secretly, for she had seen what the mortal
eyes around could not see.

“I think the game is mine,” she insisted softly.

“I think that your friends in Faery have cheated,” he replied, “but the
game is yours if you are content to win it that way.”

“I bind you,” said Becuma, “to eat no food in Ireland until you have
found Delvcaem, the daughter of Morgan.”

“Where do I look for her?” said Art in despair.

“She is in one of the islands of the sea,” Becuma replied, “that is
all I will tell you,” and she looked at him maliciously, joyously,
contentedly, for she thought he would never return from that journey,
and that Morgan would see to it.



CHAPTER IX

Art, as his father had done before him, set out for the Many-Coloured
Land, but it was from Inver Colpa he embarked and not from Ben Edair.

At a certain time he passed from the rough green ridges of the sea to
enchanted waters, and he roamed from island to island asking all people
how he might come to Delvcaem, the daughter of Morgan. But he got no
news from any one, until he reached an island that was fragrant with
wild apples, gay with flowers, and joyous with the song of birds and the
deep mellow drumming of the bees. In this island he was met by a lady,
Crede’, the Truly Beautiful, and when they had exchanged kisses, he told
her who he was and on what errand he was bent.

“We have been expecting you,” said Crede’, “but alas, poor soul, it is
a hard, and a long, bad way that you must go; for there is sea and land,
danger and difficulty between you and the daughter of Morgan.”

“Yet I must go there,” he answered.

“There is a wild dark ocean to be crossed. There is a dense wood where
every thorn on every tree is sharp as a spear-point and is curved and
clutching. There is a deep gulf to be gone through,” she said, “a place
of silence and terror, full of dumb, venomous monsters. There is an
immense oak forest--dark, dense, thorny, a place to be strayed in,
a place to be utterly bewildered and lost in. There is a vast dark
wilderness, and therein is a dark house, lonely and full of echoes, and
in it there are seven gloomy hags, who are warned already of your coming
and are waiting to plunge you in a bath of molten lead.”

“It is not a choice journey,” said Art, “but I have no choice and must
go.”

“Should you pass those hags,” she continued, “and no one has yet passed
them, you must meet Ailill of the Black Teeth, the son of Mongan Tender
Blossom, and who could pass that gigantic and terrible fighter?”

“It is not easy to find the daughter of Morgan,” said Art in a
melancholy voice.

“It is not easy,” Crede’ replied eagerly, “and if you will take my
advice--”

“Advise me,” he broke in, “for in truth there is no man standing in such
need of counsel as I do.”

“I would advise you,” said Crede’ in a low voice, “to seek no more for
the sweet daughter of Morgan, but to stay in this place where all that
is lovely is at your service.”

“But, but--” cried Art in astonishment.

“Am I not as sweet as the daughter of Morgan?” she demanded, and she
stood before him queenly and pleadingly, and her eyes took his with
imperious tenderness.

“By my hand,” he answered, “you are sweeter and lovelier than any being
under the sun, but--”

“And with me,” she said, “you will forget Ireland.”

“I am under bonds,” cried Art, “I have passed my word, and I would
not forget Ireland or cut myself from it for all the kingdoms of the
Many-Coloured Land.”

Crede’ urged no more at that time, but as they were parting she
whispered, “There are two girls, sisters of my own, in Morgan’s palace.
They will come to you with a cup in either hand; one cup will be filled
with wine and one with poison. Drink from the right-hand cup, O my
dear.”

Art stepped into his coracle, and then, wringing her hands, she made yet
an attempt to dissuade him from that drear journey.

“Do not leave me,” she urged. “Do not affront these dangers. Around the
palace of Morgan there is a palisade of copper spikes, and on the top of
each spike the head of a man grins and shrivels. There is one spike only
which bears no head, and it is for your head that spike is waiting. Do
not go there, my love.”

“I must go indeed,” said. Art earnestly.

“There is yet a danger,” she called. “Beware of Delvcaem’s mother, Dog
Head, daughter of the King of the Dog Heads. Beware of her.”

“Indeed,” said Art to himself, “there is so much to beware of that I
will beware of nothing. I will go about my business,” he said to the
waves, “and I will let those beings and monsters and the people of the
Dog Heads go about their business.”



CHAPTER X

He went forward in his light bark, and at some moment found that he
had parted from those seas and was adrift on vaster and more turbulent
billows. From those dark-green surges there gaped at him monstrous
and cavernous jaws; and round, wicked, red-rimmed, bulging eyes stared
fixedly at the boat. A ridge of inky water rushed foaming mountainously
on his board, and behind that ridge came a vast warty head that gurgled
and groaned. But at these vile creatures he thrust with his lengthy
spear or stabbed at closer reach with a dagger.

He was not spared one of the terrors which had been foretold. Thus, in
the dark thick oak forest he slew the seven hags and buried them in the
molten lead which they had heated for him. He climbed an icy mountain,
the cold breath of which seemed to slip into his body and chip off
inside of his bones, and there, until he mastered the sort of climbing
on ice, for each step that he took upwards he slipped back ten steps.
Almost his heart gave way before he learned to climb that venomous hill.
In a forked glen into which he slipped at night-fall he was surrounded
by giant toads, who spat poison, and were icy as the land they lived
in, and were cold and foul and savage. At Sliav Saev he encountered the
long-maned lions who lie in wait for the beasts of the world, growling
woefully as they squat above their prey and crunch those terrified
bones. He came on Ailill of the Black Teeth sitting on the bridge that
spanned a torrent, and the grim giant was grinding his teeth on a pillar
stone. Art drew nigh unobserved and brought him low.

It was not for nothing that these difficulties and dangers were in his
path. These things and creatures were the invention of Dog Head, the
wife of Morgan, for it had become known to her that she would die on the
day her daughter was wooed. Therefore none of the dangers encountered
by Art were real, but were magical chimeras conjured against him by the
great witch.

Affronting all, conquering all, he came in time to Morgan’s dun, a place
so lovely that after the miseries through which he had struggled he
almost wept to see beauty again.

Delvcaem knew that he was coming. She was waiting for him, yearning for
him. To her mind Art was not only love, he was freedom, for the poor
girl was a captive in her father’s home. A great pillar an hundred feet
high had been built on the roof of Morgan’s palace, and on the top of
this pillar a tiny room had been constructed, and in this room Delvcaem
was a prisoner.

She was lovelier in shape than any other princess of the Many-Coloured
Land. She was wiser than all the other women of that land, and she
was skilful in music, embroidery, and chastity, and in all else that
pertained to the knowledge of a queen.

Although Delvcaem’s mother wished nothing but ill to Art, she yet
treated him with the courtesy proper in a queen on the one hand and
fitting towards the son of the King of Ireland on the other. Therefore,
when Art entered the palace he was met and kissed, and he was bathed and
clothed and fed. Two young girls came to him then, having a cup in
each of their hands, and presented him with the kingly drink, but,
remembering the warning which Credl had given him, he drank only from
the right-hand cup and escaped the poison. Next he was visited by
Delvcaem’s mother, Dog Head, daughter of the King of the Dog Heads, and
Morgan’s queen. She was dressed in full armour, and she challenged Art
to fight with her.

It was a woeful combat, for there was no craft or sagacity unknown to
her, and Art would infallibly have perished by her hand but that her
days were numbered, her star was out, and her time had come. It was her
head that rolled on the ground when the combat was over, and it was
her head that grinned and shrivelled on the vacant spike which she had
reserved for Art’s.

Then Art liberated Delvcaem from her prison at the top of the pillar
and they were affianced together. But the ceremony had scarcely been
completed when the tread of a single man caused the palace to quake and
seemed to jar the world.

It was Morgan returning to the palace.

The gloomy king challenged him to combat also, and in his honour Art
put on the battle harness which he had brought from Ireland. He wore a
breastplate and helmet of gold, a mantle of blue satin swung from his
shoulders, his left hand was thrust into the grips of a purple
shield, deeply bossed with silver, and in the other hand he held the
wide-grooved, blue hilted sword which had rung so often into fights and
combats, and joyous feats and exercises.

Up to this time the trials through which he had passed had seemed so
great that they could not easily be added to. But if all those trials
had been gathered into one vast calamity they would not equal one half
of the rage and catastrophe of his war with Morgan.

For what he could not effect by arms Morgan would endeavour by guile,
so that while Art drove at him or parried a crafty blow, the shape of
Morgan changed before his eyes, and the monstrous king was having at him
in another form, and from a new direction.

It was well for the son of the Ard-Ri’ that he had been beloved by the
poets and magicians of his land, and that they had taught him all that
was known of shape-changing and words of power.

He had need of all these.

At times, for the weapon must change with the enemy, they fought with
their foreheads as two giant stags, and the crash of their monstrous
onslaught rolled and lingered on the air long after their skulls had
parted. Then as two lions, long-clawed, deep-mouthed, snarling, with
rigid mane, with red-eyed glare, with flashing, sharp-white fangs, they
prowled lithely about each other seeking for an opening. And then as two
green-ridged, white-topped, broad-swung, overwhelming, vehement billows
of the deep, they met and crashed and sunk into and rolled away from
each other; and the noise of these two waves was as the roar of all
ocean when the howl of the tempest is drowned in the league-long fury of
the surge.

But when the wife’s time has come the husband is doomed. He is required
elsewhere by his beloved, and Morgan went to rejoin his queen in the
world that comes after the Many-Coloured Land, and his victor shore that
knowledgeable head away from its giant shoulders.

He did not tarry in the Many-Coloured Land, for he had nothing further
to seek there. He gathered the things which pleased him best from among
the treasures of its grisly king, and with Delvcaem by his side they
stepped into the coracle.

Then, setting their minds on Ireland, they went there as it were in a
flash.

The waves of all the world seemed to whirl past them in one huge, green
cataract. The sound of all these oceans boomed in their ears for one
eternal instant. Nothing was for that moment but a vast roar and pour
of waters. Thence they swung into a silence equally vast, and so sudden
that it was as thunderous in the comparison as was the elemental rage
they quitted. For a time they sat panting, staring at each other,
holding each other, lest not only their lives but their very souls
should be swirled away in the gusty passage of world within world; and
then, looking abroad, they saw the small bright waves creaming by the
rocks of Ben Edair, and they blessed the power that had guided and
protected them, and they blessed the comely land of Ir.

On reaching Tara, Delvcaem, who was more powerful in art and magic than
Becuma, ordered the latter to go away, and she did so.

She left the king’s side. She came from the midst of the counsellors and
magicians. She did not bid farewell to any one. She did not say good-bye
to the king as she set out for Ben Edair.

Where she could go to no man knew, for she had been ban-ished from the
Many-Coloured Land and could not return there. She was forbidden entry
to the Shi’ by Angus Og, and she could not remain in Ireland. She went
to Sasana and she became a queen in that country, and it was she who
fostered the rage against the Holy Land which has not ceased to this
day.




MONGAN’S FRENZY


CHAPTER I

The abbot of the Monastery of Moville sent word to the story-tellers of
Ireland that when they were in his neighbourhood they should call at
the monastery, for he wished to collect and write down the stories which
were in danger of being forgotten.

“These things also must be told,” said he.

In particular he wished to gather tales which told of the deeds that had
been done before the Gospel came to Ireland.

“For,” said he, “there are very good tales among those ones, and it
would be a pity if the people who come after us should be ignorant of
what happened long ago, and of the deeds of their fathers.”

So, whenever a story-teller chanced in that neighbourhood he was
directed to the monastery, and there he received a welcome and his fill
of all that is good for man.

The abbot’s manuscript boxes began to fill up, and he used to regard
that growing store with pride and joy. In the evenings, when the days
grew short and the light went early, he would call for some one of these
manuscripts and have it read to him by candle-light, in order that he
might satisfy himself that it was as good as he had judged it to be on
the previous hearing.

One day a story-teller came to the monastery, and, like all the others,
he was heartily welcomed and given a great deal more than his need.

He said that his name was Cairide’, and that he had a story to tell
which could not be bettered among the stories of Ireland.

The abbot’s eyes glistened when he heard that. He rubbed his hands
together and smiled on his guest.

“What is the name of your story?” he asked.

“It is called ‘Mongan’s Frenzy.’”

“I never heard of it before,” cried the abbot joyfully.

“I am the only man that knows it,” Cairide’ replied.

“But how does that come about?” the abbot inquired.

“Because it belongs to my family,” the story-teller answered. “There
was a Cairide’ of my nation with Mongan when he went into Faery. This
Cairide’ listened to the story when it was first told. Then he told
it to his son, and his son told it to his son, and that son’s
great-great-grandson’s son told it to his son’s son, and he told it to
my father, and my father told it to me.”

“And you shall tell it to me,” cried the abbot triumphantly.

“I will indeed,” said Cairide’. Vellum was then brought and quills. The
copyists sat at their tables. Ale was placed beside the story-teller,
and he told this tale to the abbot.



CHAPTER II

Said Cairide’:

Mongan’s wife at that time was Bro’tiarna, the Flame Lady. She was
passionate and fierce, and because the blood would flood suddenly to her
cheek, so that she who had seemed a lily became, while you looked upon
her, a rose, she was called Flame Lady. She loved Mongan with ecstasy
and abandon, and for that also he called her Flame Lady.

But there may have been something of calculation even in her wildest
moment, for if she was delighted in her affection she was tormented in
it also, as are all those who love the great ones of life and strive to
equal themselves where equality is not possible.

For her husband was at once more than himself and less than himself.
He was less than himself because he was now Mongan. He was more than
himself because he was one who had long disappeared from the world of
men. His lament had been sung and his funeral games played many,
many years before, and Bro’tiarna sensed in him secrets, experiences,
knowledges in which she could have no part, and for which she was
greedily envious.

So she was continually asking him little, simple questions a’ propos of
every kind of thing.

She weighed all that he said on whatever subject, and when he talked in
his sleep she listened to his dream.

The knowledge that she gleaned from those listenings tormented her
far more than it satisfied her, for the names of other women were
continually on his lips, sometimes in terms of dear affection, sometimes
in accents of anger or despair, and in his sleep he spoke familiarly
of people whom the story-tellers told of, but who had been dead for
centuries. Therefore she was perplexed, and became filled with a very
rage of curiosity.

Among the names which her husband mentioned there was one which, because
of the frequency with which it appeared, and because of the tone of
anguish and love and longing in which it was uttered, she thought of
oftener than the others: this name was Duv Laca. Although she questioned
and cross-questioned Cairide’, her story-teller, she could discover
nothing about a lady who had been known as the Black Duck. But one night
when Mongan seemed to speak with Duv Laca he mentioned her father as
Fiachna Duv mac Demain, and the story-teller said that king had been
dead for a vast number of years.

She asked her husband then, boldly, to tell her the story of Duv Laca,
and under the influence of their mutual love he promised to tell it to
her some time, but each time she reminded him of his promise he became
confused, and said that he would tell it some other time.

As time went on the poor Flame Lady grew more and more jealous of Duv
Laca, and more and more certain that, if only she could know what
had happened, she would get some ease to her tormented heart and some
assuagement of her perfectly natural curiosity. Therefore she lost no
opportunity of reminding Mongan of his promise, and on each occasion he
renewed the promise and put it back to another time.



CHAPTER III

In the year when Ciaran the son of the Carpenter died, the same year
when Tuathal Maelgariv was killed and the year when Diarmait the son of
Cerrbel became king of all Ireland, the year 538 of our era in short, it
happened that there was a great gathering of the men of Ireland at the
Hill of Uisneach in Royal Meath.

In addition to the Council which was being held, there were games and
tournaments and brilliant deployments of troops, and universal feastings
and enjoyments. The gathering lasted for a week, and on the last day
of the week Mongan was moving through the crowd with seven guards, his
story-teller Cairide’, and his wife.

It had been a beautiful day, with brilliant sunshine and great sport,
but suddenly clouds began to gather in the sky to the west, and others
came rushing blackly from the east. When these clouds met the world went
dark for a space, and there fell from the sky a shower of hailstones, so
large that each man wondered at their size, and so swift and heavy that
the women and young people of the host screamed from the pain of the
blows they received.

Mongan’s men made a roof of their shields, and the hailstones battered
on the shields so terribly that even under them they were afraid. They
began to move away from the host looking for shelter, and when they had
gone apart a little way they turned the edge of a small hill and a knoll
of trees, and in the twinkling of an eye they were in fair weather.

One minute they heard the clashing and bashing of the hailstones, the
howling of the venomous wind, the screams of women and the uproar of the
crowd on the Hill of Uisneach, and the next minute they heard nothing
more of those sounds and saw nothing more of these sights, for they had
been permitted to go at one step out of the world of men and into the
world of Faery.



CHAPTER IV

There is a difference between this world and the world of Faery, but it
is not immediately perceptible. Everything that is here is there, but
the things that are there are better than those that are here. All
things that are bright are there brighter. There is more gold in the
sun and more silver in the moon of that land. There is more scent in the
flowers, more savour in the fruit. There is more comeliness in the men
and more tenderness in the women. Everything in Faery is better by this
one wonderful degree, and it is by this betterness you will know that
you are there if you should ever happen to get there.

Mongan and his companions stepped from the world of storm into sunshine
and a scented world. The instant they stepped they stood, bewildered,
looking at each other silently, questioningly, and then with one accord
they turned to look back whence they had come.

There was no storm behind them. The sunlight drowsed there as it did in
front, a peaceful flooding of living gold. They saw the shapes of
the country to which their eyes were accustomed, and recognised the
well-known landmarks, but it seemed that the distant hills were a trifle
higher, and the grass which clothed them and stretched between was
greener, was more velvety: that the trees were better clothed and had
more of peace as they hung over the quiet ground.

But Mongan knew what had happened, and he smiled with glee as he watched
his astonished companions, and he sniffed that balmy air as one whose
nostrils remembered it.

“You had better come with me,” he said.

“Where are we?” his wife asked. “Why, we are here,” cried Mongan; “where
else should we be?”

He set off then, and the others followed, staring about them cautiously,
and each man keeping a hand on the hilt of his sword.

“Are we in Faery?” the Flame Lady asked.

“We are,” said Mongan.

When they had gone a little distance they came to a grove of ancient
trees. Mightily tail and well grown these trees were, and the trunk of
each could not have been spanned by ten broad men. As they went among
these quiet giants into the dappled obscurity and silence, their
thoughts became grave, and all the motions of their minds elevated
as though they must equal in greatness and dignity those ancient and
glorious trees. When they passed through the grove they saw a lovely
house before them, built of mellow wood and with a roof of bronze--it
was like the dwelling of a king, and over the windows of the Sunny Room
there was a balcony. There were ladies on this balcony, and when they
saw the travellers approaching they sent messengers to welcome them.

Mongan and his companions were then brought into the house, and all was
done for them that could be done for honoured guests. Everything within
the house was as excellent as all without, and it was inhabited by seven
men and seven women, and it was evident that Mongan and these people
were well acquainted.

In the evening a feast was prepared, and when they had eaten well there
was a banquet. There were seven vats of wine, and as Mongan loved wine
he was very happy, and he drank more on that occasion than any one had
ever noticed him to drink before.

It was while he was in this condition of glee and expansion that the
Flame Lady put her arms about his neck and begged he would tell her the
story of Duv Laca, and, being boisterous then and full of good spirits,
he agreed to her request, and he prepared to tell the tale.

The seven men and seven women of the Fairy Palace then took their
places about him in a half-circle; his own seven guards sat behind
them; his wife, the Flame Lady, sat by his side; and at the back of
all Cairid, his story-teller sat, listening with all his ears, and
remembering every word that was uttered.



CHAPTER V

Said Mongan:

In the days of long ago and the times that have disappeared for ever,
there was one Fiachna Finn the son of Baltan, the son of Murchertach,
the son of Muredach, the son of Eogan, the son of Neill. He went from
his own country when he was young, for he wished to see the land of
Lochlann, and he knew that he would be welcomed by the king of that
country, for Fiachna’s father and Eolgarg’s father had done deeds in
common and were obliged to each other.

He was welcomed, and he stayed at the Court of Lochlann in great ease
and in the midst of pleasures.

It then happened that Eolgarg Mor fell sick and the doctors could not
cure him. They sent for other doctors, but they could not cure him, nor
could any one say what he was suffering from, beyond that he was wasting
visibly before their eyes, and would certainly become a shadow and
disappear in air unless he was healed and fattened and made visible.

They sent for more distant doctors, and then for others more distant
still, and at last they found a man who claimed that he could make a
cure if the king were supplied with the medicine which he would order.

“What medicine is that?” said they all.

“This is the medicine,” said the doctor. “Find a perfectly white cow
with red ears, and boil it down in the lump, and if the king drinks that
rendering he will recover.”

Before he had well said it messengers were going from the palace in all
directions looking for such a cow. They found lots of cows which were
nearly like what they wanted, but it was only by chance they came on
the cow which would do the work, and that beast belonged to the most
notorious and malicious and cantankerous female in Lochlann, the Black
Hag. Now the Black Hag was not only those things that have been said;
she was also whiskered and warty and one-eyed and obstreperous, and she
was notorious and ill-favoured in many other ways also.

They offered her a cow in the place of her own cow, but she refused to
give it. Then they offered a cow for each leg of her cow, but she would
not accept that offer unless Fiachna went bail for the payment. He
agreed to do so, and they drove the beast away.

On the return journey he was met by messengers who brought news from
Ireland. They said that the King of Ulster was dead, and that he,
Fiachna Finn, had been elected king in the dead king’s place. He at once
took ship for Ireland, and found that all he had been told was true, and
he took up the government of Ulster.



CHAPTER VI

A year passed, and one day as he was sitting at judgement there came
a great noise from without, and this noise was so persistent that the
people and suitors were scandalised, and Fiachna at last ordered that
the noisy person should be brought before him to be judged.

It was done, and to his surprise the person turned out to be the Black
Hag.

She blamed him in the court before his people, and complained that he
had taken away her cow, and that she had not been paid the four cows he
had gone bail for, and she demanded judgement from him and justice.

“If you will consider it to be justice, I will give you twenty cows
myself,” said Fiachna.

“I would not take all the cows in Ulster,” she screamed.

“Pronounce judgement yourself,” said the king, “and if I can do what you
demand I will do it.” For he did not like to be in the wrong, and he did
not wish that any person should have an unsatisfied claim upon him.

The Black Hag then pronounced judgement, and the king had to fulfil it.

“I have come,” said she, “from the east to the west; you must come from
the west to the east and make war for me, and revenge me on the King of
Lochlann.”

Fiachna had to do as she demanded, and, although it was with a heavy
heart, he set out in three days’ time for Lochlann, and he brought with
him ten battalions.

He sent messengers before him to Big Eolgarg warning him of his coming,
of his intention, and of the number of troops he was bringing; and when
he landed Eolgarg met him with an equal force, and they fought together.

In the first battle three hundred of the men of Lochlann were killed,
but in the next battle Eolgarg Mor did not fight fair, for he let some
venomous sheep out of a tent, and these attacked the men of Ulster and
killed nine hundred of them.

So vast was the slaughter made by these sheep and so great the terror
they caused, that no one could stand before them, but by great good luck
there was a wood at hand, and the men of Ulster, warriors and princes
and charioteers, were forced to climb up the trees, and they roosted
among the branches like great birds, while the venomous sheep ranged
below bleating terribly and tearing up the ground.

Fiachna Fim was also sitting in a tree, very high up, and he was
disconsolate.

“We are disgraced,” said he.

“It is very lucky,” said the man in the branch below, “that a sheep
cannot climb a tree.”

“We are disgraced for ever,” said the King of Ulster.

“If those sheep learn how to climb, we are undone surely,” said the man
below.

“I will go down and fight the sheep,” said Fiachna. But the others would
not let the king go.

“It is not right,” they said, “that you should fight sheep.”

“Some one must fight them,” said Fiachna Finn, “but no more of my men
shall die until I fight myself; for if I am fated to die, I will die and
I cannot escape it, and if it is the sheep’s fate to die, then die they
will; for there is no man can avoid destiny, and there is no sheep can
dodge it either.”

“Praise be to god!” said the warrior that was higher up.

“Amen!” said the man who was higher than he, and the rest of the
warriors wished good luck to the king.

He started then to climb down the tree with a heavy heart, but while
he hung from the last branch and was about to let go, he noticed a tall
warrior walking towards him. The king pulled himself up on the branch
again and sat dangle-legged on it to see what the warrior would do.

The stranger was a very tall man, dressed in a green cloak with a silver
brooch at the shoulder. He had a golden band about his hair and golden
sandals on his feet, and he was laughing heartily at the plight of the
men of Ireland.


CHAPTER VII

“It is not nice of you to laugh at us,” said Fiachna Finn.

“Who could help laughing at a king hunkering on a branch and his army
roosting around him like hens?” said the stranger.

“Nevertheless,” the king replied, “it would be courteous of you not to
laugh at misfortune.”

“We laugh when we can,” commented the stranger, “and are thankful for
the chance.”

“You may come up into the tree,” said Fiachna, “for I perceive that you
are a mannerly person, and I see that some of the venomous sheep are
charging in this direction. I would rather protect you,” he continued,
“than see you killed; for,” said he lamentably, “I am getting down now
to fight the sheep.”

“They will not hurt me,” said the stranger. “Who are you?” the king
asked.

“I am Mananna’n, the son of Lir.”

Fiachna knew then that the stranger could not be hurt.

“What will you give me if I deliver you from the sheep?” asked
Mananna’n.

“I will give you anything you ask, if I have that thing.”

“I ask the rights of your crown and of your household for one day.”

Fiachna’s breath was taken away by that request, and he took a little
time to compose himself, then he said mildly:

“I will not have one man of Ireland killed if I can save him. All that
I have they give me, all that I have I give to them, and if I must give
this also, then I will give this, although it would be easier for me to
give my life.” “That is agreed,” said Mannana’n.

He had something wrapped in a fold of his cloak, and he unwrapped and
produced this thing.

It was a dog.

Now if the sheep were venomous, this dog was more venomous still, for it
was fearful to look at. In body it was not large, but its head was of a
great size, and the mouth that was shaped in that head was able to open
like the lid of a pot. It was not teeth which were in that head, but
hooks and fangs and prongs. Dreadful was that mouth to look at, terrible
to look into, woeful to think about; and from it, or from the broad,
loose nose that waggled above it, there came a sound which no word of
man could describe, for it was not a snarl, nor was it a howl, although
it was both of these. It was neither a growl nor a grunt, although it
was both of these; it was not a yowl nor a groan, although it was both
of these: for it was one sound made up of these sounds, and there was in
it, too, a whine and a yelp, and a long-drawn snoring noise, and a deep
purring noise, and a noise that was like the squeal of a rusty hinge,
and there were other noises in it also.

“The gods be praised!” said the man who was in the branch above the
king.

“What for this time?” said the king.

“Because that dog cannot climb a tree,” said the man.

And the man on a branch yet above him groaned out “Amen!”

“There is nothing to frighten sheep like a dog,” said Mananna’n, “and
there is nothing to frighten these sheep like this dog.”

He put the dog on the ground then.

“Little dogeen, little treasure,” said he, “go and kill the sheep.”

And when he said that the dog put an addition and an addendum on to the
noise he had been making before, so that the men of Ireland stuck their
fingers into their ears and turned the whites of their eyes upwards, and
nearly fell off their branches with the fear and the fright which that
sound put into them.

It did not take the dog long to do what he had been ordered. He went
forward, at first, with a slow waddle, and as the venomous sheep came to
meet him in bounces, he then went to meet them in wriggles; so that in a
while he went so fast that you could see nothing of him but a head and
a wriggle. He dealt with the sheep in this way, a jump and a chop for
each, and he never missed his jump and he never missed his chop. When he
got his grip he swung round on it as if it was a hinge. The swing began
with the chop, and it ended with the bit loose and the sheep giving its
last kick. At the end of ten minutes all the sheep were lying on the
ground, and the same bit was out of every sheep, and every sheep was
dead.

“You can come down now,” said Mananna’n.

“That dog can’t climb a tree,” said the man in the branch above the king
warningly.

“Praise be to the gods!” said the man who was above him.

“Amen!” said the warrior who was higher up than that. And the man in the
next tree said:

“Don’t move a hand or a foot until the dog chokes himself to death on
the dead meat.”

The dog, however, did not eat a bit of the meat. He trotted to his
master, and Mananna’n took him up and wrapped him in his cloak.

“Now you can come down,” said he.

“I wish that dog was dead!” said the king.

But he swung himself out of the tree all the same, for he did not wish
to seem frightened before Mananna’n. “You can go now and beat the men
of Lochlann,” said Mananna’n. “You will be King of Lochlann before
nightfall.”

“I wouldn’t mind that,” said the king. “It’s no threat,” said Mananna’n.

The son of Lir turned then and went away in the direction of Ireland to
take up his one-day rights, and Fiachna continued his battle with the
Lochlannachs.

He beat them before nightfall, and by that victory he became King of
Lochlann and King of the Saxons and the Britons.

He gave the Black Hag seven castles with their territories, and he gave
her one hundred of every sort of cattle that he had captured. She was
satisfied.

Then he went back to Ireland, and after he had been there for some time
his wife gave birth to a son.



CHAPTER VIII

“You have not told me one word about Duv Laca,” said the Flame Lady
reproachfully.

“I am coming to that,” replied Mongan.

He motioned towards one of the great vats, and wine was brought to him,
of which he drank so joyously and so deeply that all people wondered at
his thirst, his capacity, and his jovial spirits.

“Now, I will begin again.”


Said Mongan: There was an attendant in Fiachna Finn’s palace who was
called An Da’v, and the same night that Fiachna’s wife bore a son, the
wife of An Da’v gave birth to a son also. This latter child was called
mac an Da’v, but the son of Fiachna’s wife was named Mongan.

“Ah!” murmured the Flame Lady.

The queen was angry. She said it was unjust and presumptuous that the
servant should get a child at the same time that she got one herself,
but there was no help for it, because the child was there and could not
be obliterated.

Now this also must be told.

There was a neighbouring prince called Fiachna Duv, and he was the ruler
of the Dal Fiatach. For a long time he had been at enmity and spiteful
warfare with Fiachna Finn; and to this Fiachna Duv there was born in
the same night a daughter, and this girl was named Duv Laca of the White
Hand.

“Ah!” cried the Flame Lady.

“You see!” said Mongan, and he drank anew and joyously of the fairy
wine.

In order to end the trouble between Fiachna Finn and Fiachna Duv the
babies were affianced to each other in the cradle on the day after they
were born, and the men of Ireland rejoiced at that deed and at that
news. But soon there came dismay and sorrow in the land, for when the
little Mongan was three days old his real father, Mananna’n the son
of Lir, appeared in the middle of the palace. He wrapped Mongan in his
green cloak and took him away to rear and train in the Land of Promise,
which is beyond the sea that is at the other side of the grave.

When Fiachna Duv heard that Mongan, who was affianced to his daughter
Duv Laca, had disappeared, he considered that his compact of peace was
at an end, and one day he came by surprise and attacked the palace.
He killed Fiachna Finn in that battle, and be crowned himself King of
Ulster.

The men of Ulster disliked him, and they petitioned Mananna’n to bring
Mongan back, but Mananna’n would not do this until the boy was sixteen
years of age and well reared in the wisdom of the Land of Promise. Then
he did bring Mongan back, and by his means peace was made between Mongan
and Fiachna Duv, and Mongan was married to his cradle-bride, the young
Duv Laca.



CHAPTER IX

One day Mongan and Duv Laca were playing chess in their palace. Mongan
had just made a move of skill, and he looked up from the board to see
if Duv Laca seemed as discontented as she had a right to be. He saw
then over Duv Laca’s shoulder a little black-faced, tufty-headed cleric
leaning against the door-post inside the room.

“What are you doing there?” said Mongan.

“What are you doing there yourself?” said the little black-faced cleric.

“Indeed, I have a right to be in my own house,” said Mongan.

“Indeed I do not agree with you,” said the cleric.

“Where ought I be, then?” said Mongan.

“You ought to be at Dun Fiathac avenging the murder of your father,”
 replied the cleric, “and you ought to be ashamed of yourself for not
having done it long ago. You can play chess with your wife when you have
won the right to leisure.”

“But how can I kill my wife’s father?” Mongan exclaimed. “By starting
about it at once,” said the cleric. “Here is a way of talking!” said
Mongan.

“I know,” the cleric continued, “that Duv Laca will not agree with a
word I say on this subject, and that she will try to prevent you from
doing what you have a right to do, for that is a wife’s business, but a
man’s business is to do what I have just told you; so come with me now
and do not wait to think about it, and do not wait to play any more
chess. Fiachna Duv has only a small force with him at this moment,
and we can burn his palace as he burned your father’s palace, and
kill himself as he killed your father, and crown you King of Ulster
rightfully the way he crowned himself wrongfully as a king.”

“I begin to think that you own a lucky tongue, my black-faced friend,”
 said Mongan, “and I will go with you.”

He collected his forces then, and he burned Fiachna Duv’s fortress, and
he killed Fiachna Duv, and he was crowned King of Ulster.

Then for the first time he felt secure and at liberty to play chess.
But he did not know until afterwards that the black-faced, tufty-headed
person was his father Mananna’n, although that was the fact.

There are some who say, however, that Fiachna the Black was killed in
the year 624 by the lord of the Scot’s Dal Riada, Condad Cerr, at the
battle of Ard Carainn; but the people who say this do not know what they
are talking about, and they do not care greatly what it is they say.



CHAPTER X

“There is nothing to marvel about in this Duv Laca,” said the Flame Lady
scornfully. “She has got married, and she has been beaten at chess. It
has happened before.”

“Let us keep to the story,” said Mongan, and, having taken some few
dozen deep draughts of the wine, he became even more jovial than before.
Then he recommenced his tale:

It happened on a day that Mongan had need of treasure. He had many
presents to make, and he had not as much gold and silver and cattle as
was proper for a king. He called his nobles together and discussed what
was the best thing to be done, and it was arranged that he should visit
the provincial kings and ask boons from them.

He set out at once on his round of visits, and the first province he
went to was Leinster.

The King of Leinster at that time was Branduv, the son of Echach. He
welcomed Mongan and treated him well, and that night Mongan slept in his
palace.

When he awoke in the morning he looked out of a lofty window, and he
saw on the sunny lawn before the palace a herd of cows. There were fifty
cows in all, for he counted them, and each cow had a calf beside her,
and each cow and calf was pure white in colour, and each of them had red
ears.

When Mongan saw these cows, he fell in love with them as he had never
fallen in love with anything before.

He came down from the window and walked on the sunny lawn among the
cows, looking at each of them and speaking words of affection and
endearment to them all; and while he was thus walking and talking and
looking and loving, he noticed that some one was moving beside him. He
looked from the cows then, and saw that the King of Leinster was at his
side.

“Are you in love with the cows?” Branduv asked him.

“I am,” said Mongan.

“Everybody is,” said the King of Leinster.

“I never saw anything like them,” said Mongan.

“Nobody has,” said the King of Leinster.

“I never saw anything I would rather have than these cows,” said Mongan.

“These,” said the King of Leinster, “are the most beautiful cows
in Ireland, and,” he continued thoughtfully, “Duv Laca is the most
beautiful woman in Ireland.”

“There is no lie in what you say,” said Mongan.

“Is it not a queer thing,” said the King of Leinster, “that I should
have what you want with all your soul, and you should have what I want
with all my heart?”

“Queer indeed,” said Mongan, “but what is it that you do want?”

“Duv Laca, of course,” said the King of Leinster.

“Do you mean,” said Mongan, “that you would exchange this herd of fifty
pure white cows having red ears--”

“And their fifty calves,” said the King of Leinster--

“For Duv Laca, or for any woman in the world?”

“I would,” cried the King of Leinster, and he thumped his knee as he
said it.

“Done,” roared Mongan, and the two kings shook hands on the bargain.

Mongan then called some of his own people, and before any more words
could be said and before any alteration could be made, he set his men
behind the cows and marched home with them to Ulster.



CHAPTER XI

Duv Laca wanted to know where the cows came from, and Mongan told her
that the King of Leinster had given them to him. She fell in love with
them as Mongan had done, but there was nobody in the world could have
avoided loving those cows: such cows they were! such wonders! Mongan
and Duv Laca used to play chess together, and then they would go out
together to look at the cows, and then they would go in together and
would talk to each other about the cows. Everything they did they did
together, for they loved to be with each other.

However, a change came.

One morning a great noise of voices and trampling of horses and rattle
of armour came about the palace. Mongan looked from the window.

“Who is coming?” asked Duv Laca.

But he did not answer her.

“The noise must announce the visit of a king,” Duv Laca continued.

But Mongan did not say a word. Duv Laca then went to the window.

“Who is that king?” she asked.

And her husband replied to her then.

“That is the King of Leinster,” said he mournfully.

“Well,” said Duv Laca surprised, “is he not welcome?”

“He is welcome indeed,” said Mongan lamentably.

“Let us go out and welcome him properly,” Duv Laca suggested.

“Let us not go near him at all,” said Mongan, “for he is coming to
complete his bargain.”

“What bargain are you talking about?” Duv Laca asked. But Mongan would
not answer that.

“Let us go out,” said he, “for we must go out.”

Mongan and Duv Laca went out then and welcomed the King of Leinster.
They brought him and his chief men into the palace, and water was
brought for their baths, and rooms were appointed for them, and
everything was done that should be done for guests.

That night there was a feast, and after the feast there was a banquet,
and all through the feast and the banquet the King of Leinster stared
at Duv Laca with joy, and sometimes his breast was delivered of great
sighs, and at times he moved as though in perturbation of spirit and
mental agony.

“There is something wrong with the King of Leinster,” Duv Laca
whispered.

“I don’t care if there is,” said Mongan.

“You must ask what he wants.”

“But I don’t want to know it,” said Mongan. “Nevertheless, you musk ask
him,” she insisted.

So Mongan did ask him, and it was in a melancholy voice that he asked
it.

“Do you want anything?” said he to the King of Leinster.

“I do indeed,” said Branduv.

“If it is in Ulster I will get it for you,” said Mongan mournfully.

“It is in Ulster,” said Branduv.

Mongan did not want to say anything more then, but the King of Leinster
was so intent and everybody else was listening and Duv Laca was nudging
his arm, so he said: “What is it that you do want?” “I want Duv Laca.”

“I want her too,” said Mongan.

“You made your bargain,” said the King of Leinster, “my cows and their
calves for your Duv Laca, and the man that makes a bargain keeps a
bargain.”

“I never before heard,” said Mongan, “of a man giving away his own
wife.”

“Even if you never heard of it before, you must do it now,” said Duv
Laca, “for honour is longer than life.”

Mongan became angry when Duv Laca said that. His face went red as a
sunset, and the veins swelled in his neck and his forehead.

“Do you say that?” he cried to Duv Laca.

“I do,” said Duv Laca.

“Let the King of Leinster take her,” said Mongan.



CHAPTER XII

Duv Laca and the King of Leinster went apart then to speak together, and
the eye of the king seemed to be as big as a plate, so fevered was
it and so enlarged and inflamed by the look of Duv Laca. He was so
confounded with joy also that his words got mixed up with his teeth, and
Duv Laca did not know exactly what it was he was trying to say, and
he did not seem to know himself. But at last he did say something
intelligible, and this is what he said.

“I am a very happy man,” said he.

“And I,” said Duv Laca, “am the happiest woman in the world.”

“Why should you be happy?” the astonished king demanded.

“Listen to me,” she said. “If you tried to take me away from this place
against my own wish, one half of the men of Ulster would be dead before
you got me and the other half would be badly wounded in my defence.”

“A bargain is a bargain,” the King of Leinster began.

“But,” she continued, “they will not prevent my going away, for they all
know that I have been in love with you for ages.”

“What have you been in with me for ages?” said the amazed king.

“In love with you,” replied Duv Laca.

“This is news,” said the king, “and it is good news.”

“But, by my word,” said Duv Laca, “I will not go with you unless you
grant me a boon.”

“All that I have,” cried Branduv, “and all that every-body has.”

“And you must pass your word and pledge your word that you will do what
I ask.”

“I pass it and pledge it,” cried the joyful king.

“Then,” said Duv Laca, “this is what I bind on you.”

“Light the yolk!” he cried.

“Until one year is up and out you are not to pass the night in any house
that I am in.”

“By my head and hand!” Branduv stammered.

“And if you come into a house where I am during the time and term of
that year, you are not to sit down in the chair that I am sitting in.”

“Heavy is my doom!” he groaned.

“But,” said Duv Laca, “if I am sitting in a chair or a seat you are
to sit in a chair that is over against me and opposite to me and at a
distance from me.”

“Alas!” said the king, and he smote his hands together, and then he beat
them on his head, and then he looked at them and at everything about,
and he could not tell what anything was or where anything was, for his
mind was clouded and his wits had gone astray.

“Why do you bind these woes on me?” he pleaded.


“I wish to find out if you truly love me.”

“But I do,” said the king. “I love you madly and dearly, and with all my
faculties and members.”

“That is the way! love you,” said Duv Laca. “We shall have a notable
year of courtship and joy. And let us go now,” she continued, “for I am
impatient to be with you.”

“Alas!” said Branduv, as he followed her. “Alas, alas!” said the King of
Leinster.



CHAPTER XIII

“I think,” said the Flame Lady, “that whoever lost that woman had no
reason to be sad.”

Mongan took her chin in his hand and kissed her lips.

“All that you say is lovely, for you are lovely,” said he, “and you are
my delight and the joy of the world.”

Then the attendants brought him wine, and he drank so joyously of that
and so deeply, that those who observed him thought he would surely burst
and drown them. But he laughed loudly and with enormous delight, until
the vessels of gold and silver and bronze chimed mellowly to his peal
and the rafters of the house went creaking.

Said he:

Mongan loved Duv Laca of the White Hand better than he loved his life,
better than he loved his honour. The kingdoms of the world did not weigh
with him beside the string of her shoe. He would not look at a sunset
if he could see her. He would not listen to a harp if he could hear her
speak, for she was the delight of ages, the gem of time, and the wonder
of the world till Doom.

She went to Leinster with the king of that country, and when she had
gone Mongan fell grievously sick, so that it did not seem he could ever
recover again; and he began to waste and wither, and he began to look
like a skeleton, and a bony structure, and a misery.

Now this also must be known.

Duv Laca had a young attendant, who was her foster-sister as well as her
servant, and on the day that she got married to Mongan, her attendant
was married to mac an Da’v, who was servant and foster-brother to
Mongan. When Duv Laca went away with the King of Leinster, her servant,
mac an Da’v’s wife, went with her, so there were two wifeless men
in Ulster at that time, namely, Mongan the king and mac an Da’v his
servant.

One day as Mongan sat in the sun, brooding lamentably on his fate, mac
an Da’v came to him.

“How are things with you, master?” asked Mac an Da’v.

“Bad,” said Mongan.

“It was a poor day brought you off with Mananna’n to the Land of
Promise,” said his servant.

“Why should you think that?” inquired Mongan.

“Because,” said mac an Da’v, “you learned nothing in the Land of Promise
except how to eat a lot of food and how to do nothing in a deal of
time.”

“What business is it of yours?” said Mongan angrily.

“It is my business surely,” said mac an Da’v, “for my wife has gone off
to Leinster with your wife, and she wouldn’t have gone if you hadn’t
made a bet and a bargain with that accursed king.”

Mac an Da’v began to weep then.

“I didn’t make a bargain with any king,” said he, “and yet my wife has
gone away with one, and it’s all because of you.”

“There is no one sorrier for you than I am,” said Mongan.

“There is indeed,” said mac an Da’v, “for I am sorrier myself.”

Mongan roused himself then.

“You have a claim on me truly,” said he, “and I will not have any one
with a claim on me that is not satisfied. Go,” he said to mac an Da’v,
“to that fairy place we both know of. You remember the baskets I left
there with the sod from Ireland in one and the sod from Scotland in the
other; bring me the baskets and sods.”

“Tell me the why of this?” said his servant.

“The King of Leinster will ask his wizards what I am doing, and this is
what I will be doing. I will get on your back with a foot in each of the
baskets, and when Branduv asks the wizards where I am they will tell him
that I have one leg in Ireland and one leg in Scotland, and as long as
they tell him that he will think he need not bother himself about me,
and we will go into Leinster that way.”

“No bad way either,” said mac an Da’v.

They set out then.



CHAPTER XIV

It was a long, uneasy journey, for although mac an Da’v was of stout
heart and goodwill, yet no man can carry another on his back from Ulster
to Leinster and go quick. Still, if you keep on driving a pig or a story
they will get at last to where you wish them to go, and the man who
continues putting one foot in front of the other will leave his home
behind, and will come at last to the edge of the sea and the end of the
world.

When they reached Leinster the feast of Moy Life’ was being held, and
they pushed on by forced marches and long stages so as to be in time,
and thus they came to the Moy of Cell Camain, and they mixed with the
crowd that were going to the feast.

A great and joyous concourse of people streamed about them. There were
young men and young girls, and when these were not holding each other’s
hands it was because their arms were round each other’s necks. There
were old, lusty women going by, and when these were not talking together
it was because their mouths were mutually filled with apples and
meat-pies. There were young warriors with mantles of green and purple
and red flying behind them on the breeze, and when these were not
looking disdainfully on older soldiers it was because the older soldiers
happened at the moment to be looking at them. There were old warriors
with yard-long beards flying behind their shoulders llke wisps of hay,
and when these were not nursing a broken arm or a cracked skull, it was
because they were nursing wounds in their stomachs or their legs. There
were troops of young women who giggled as long as their breaths lasted
and beamed when it gave out. Bands of boys who whispered mysteriously
together and pointed with their fingers in every direction at once, and
would suddenly begin to run like a herd of stampeded horses. There were
men with carts full of roasted meats. Women with little vats full of
mead, and others carrying milk and beer. Folk of both sorts with towers
swaying on their heads, and they dripping with honey. Children having
baskets piled with red apples, and old women who peddled shell-fish and
boiled lobsters. There were people who sold twenty kinds of bread, with
butter thrown in. Sellers of onions and cheese, and others who supplied
spare bits of armour, odd scabbards, spear handles, breastplate-laces.
People who cut your hair or told your fortune or gave you a hot bath in
a pot. Others who put a shoe on your horse or a piece of embroidery on
your mantle; and others, again, who took stains off your sword or dyed
your finger-nails or sold you a hound.

It was a great and joyous gathering that was going to the feast.

Mongan and his servant sat against a grassy hedge by the roadside and
watched the multitude streaming past.

Just then Mongan glanced to the right whence the people were coming.
Then he pulled the hood of his cloak over his ears and over his brow.

“Alas!” said he in a deep and anguished voice.

Mac an Da’v turned to him.

“Is it a pain in your stomach, master?”

“It is not,” said Mongan. “Well, what made you make that brutal and
belching noise?”

“It was a sigh I gave,” said Mongan.

“Whatever it was,” said mac an Da’v, “what was it?”

“Look down the road on this side and tell me who is coming,” said his
master.

“It is a lord with his troop.”

“It is the King of Leinster,” said Mongan. “The man,” said mac an Da’v
in a tone of great pity, “the man that took away your wife! And,” he
roared in a voice of extraordinary savagery, “the man that took away my
wife into the bargain, and she not in the bargain.”

“Hush,” said Mongan, for a man who heard his shout stopped to tie a
sandie, or to listen.

“Master,” said mac an Da’v as the troop drew abreast and moved past.

“What is it, my good friend?”

“Let me throw a little small piece of a rock at the King of Leinster.”

“I will not.”

“A little bit only, a small bit about twice the size of my head.”

“I will not let you,” said Mongan.

When the king had gone by mac an Da’v groaned a deep and dejected groan.

“Oco’n!” said he. “Oco’n-i’o-go-deo’!” said he.

The man who had tied his sandal said then: “Are you in pain, honest
man?”

“I am not in pain,” said mac an Da’v.

“Well, what was it that knocked a howl out of you like the yelp of a
sick dog, honest man?”

“Go away,” said mac an Da’v, “go away, you flat-faced, nosey person.”
 “There is no politeness left in this country,” said the stranger, and he
went away to a certain distance, and from thence he threw a stone at mac
an Da’v’s nose, and hit it.



CHAPTER XV

The road was now not so crowded as it had been. Minutes would pass and
only a few travellers would come, and minutes more would go when nobody
was in sight at all.

Then two men came down the road: they were clerics.

“I never saw that kind of uniform before,” said mac an Da’v.

“Even if you didn’t,” said Mongan, “there are plenty of them about. They
are men that don’t believe in our gods,” said he.

“Do they not, indeed?” said mac an Da’v. “The rascals!” said he. “What,
what would Mananna’n say to that?”

“The one in front carrying the big book is Tibraide’. He is the priest
of Cell Camain, and he is the chief of those two.”

“Indeed, and indeed!” said mac an Da’v. “The one behind must be his
servant, for he has a load on his back.”

The priests were reading their offices, and mac an Da’v marvelled at
that.


“What is it they are doing?” said he.

“They are reading.”

“Indeed, and indeed they are,” said mac an Da’v. “I can’t make out a
word of the language except that the man behind says amen, amen, every
time the man in front puts a grunt out of him. And they don’t like our
gods at all!” said mac an Da’v.

“They do not,” said Mongan.

“Play a trick on them, master,” said mac an Da’v. Mongan agreed to play
a trick on the priests.

He looked at them hard for a minute, and then he waved his hand at them.

The two priests stopped, and they stared straight in front of them, and
then they looked at each other, and then they looked at the sky. The
clerk began to bless himself, and then Tibraide’ began to bless himself,
and after that they didn’t know what to do. For where there had been a
road with hedges on each side and fields stretching beyond them, there
was now no road, no hedge, no field; but there was a great broad river
sweeping across their path; a mighty tumble of yellowy-brown waters,
very swift, very savage; churning and billowing and jockeying among
rough boulders and islands of stone. It was a water of villainous depth
and of detestable wetness; of ugly hurrying and of desolate cavernous
sound. At a little to their right there was a thin uncomely bridge that
waggled across the torrent.

Tibraide’ rubbed his eyes, and then he looked again. “Do you see what I
see?” said he to the clerk.

“I don’t know what you see,” said the clerk, “but what I see I never did
see before, and I wish I did not see it now.”

“I was born in this place,” said Tibraide’, “my father was born here
before me, and my grandfather was born here before him, but until this
day and this minute I never saw a river here before, and I never heard
of one.”

“What will we do at all?” said the clerk. “What will we do at all?”

“We will be sensible,” said Tibraide’ sternly, “and we will go about our
business,” said he. “If rivers fall out of the sky what has that to do
with you, and if there is a river here, which there is, why, thank God,
there is a bridge over it too.”

“Would you put a toe on that bridge?” said the clerk. “What is the
bridge for?” said Tibraide’ Mongan and mac an Da’v followed them.

When they got to the middle of the bridge it broke under them, and they
were precipitated into that boiling yellow flood.

Mongan snatched at the book as it fell from Tibraide’s hand.

“Won’t you let them drown, master?” asked mac an Da’v.

“No,” said Mongan, “I’ll send them a mile down the stream, and then they
can come to land.”

Mongan then took on himself the form of Tibraide’ and he turned mac an
Da’v into the shape of the clerk.

“My head has gone bald,” said the servant in a whisper.

“That is part of it,” replied Mongan. “So long as we know,” said mac an
Da’v.

They went on then to meet the King of Leinster.



CHAPTER XVI

They met him near the place where the games were played.

“Good my soul, Tibraide’!” cried the King of Leinster, and he gave
Mongan a kiss. Mongan kissed him back again.

“Amen, amen,” said mac an Da’v.

“What for?” said the King of Leinster.

And then mac an Da’v began to sneeze, for he didn’t know what for.

“It is a long time since I saw you, Tibraide’,” said the king, “but at
this minute I am in great haste and hurry. Go you on before me to the
fortress, and you can talk to the queen that you’ll find there, she that
used to be the King of Ulster’s wife. Kevin Cochlach, my charioteer,
will go with you, and I will follow you myself in a while.”

The King of Leinster went off then, and Mongan and his servant went with
the charioteer and the people.

Mongan read away out of the book, for he found it interesting, and he
did not want to talk to the charioteer, and mac an Da’v cried amen,
amen, every time that Mongan took his breath. The people who were going
with them said to one another that mac an Da’v was a queer kind of
clerk, and that they had never seen any one who had such a mouthful of
amens.

But in a while they came to the fortress, and they got into it without
any trouble, for Kevin Cochlach, the king’s charioteer, brought them in.
Then they were led to the room where Duv Laca was, and as he went into
that room Mongan shut his eyes, for he did not want to look at Duv Laca
while other people might be looking at him.

“Let everybody leave this room, while I am talking to the queen,” said
he; and all the attendants left the room, except one, and she wouldn’t
go, for she wouldn’t leave her mistress.

Then Mongan opened his eyes and he saw Duv Laca, and he made a great
bound to her and took her in his arms, and mac an Da’v made a savage and
vicious and terrible jump at the attendant, and took her in his arms,
and bit her ear and kissed her neck and wept down into her back.

“Go away,” said the girl, “unhand me, villain,” said she.

“I will not,” said mac an Da’v, “for I’m your own husband, I’m your own
mac, your little mac, your macky-wac-wac.” Then the attendant gave a
little squeal, and she bit him on each ear and kissed his neck and wept
down into his back, and said that it wasn’t true and that it was.



CHAPTER XVII

But they were not alone, although they thought they were. The hag that
guarded the jewels was in the room. She sat hunched up against the wail,
and as she looked like a bundle of rags they did not notice her. She
began to speak then.

“Terrible are the things I see,” said she. “Terrible are the things I
see.”

Mongan and his servant gave a jump of surprise, and their two wives
jumped and squealed. Then Mongan puffed out his cheeks till his face
looked like a bladder, and he blew a magic breath at the hag, so that
she seemed to be surrounded by a fog, and when she looked through that
breath everything seemed to be different to what she had thought. Then
she began to beg everybody’s pardon.

“I had an evil vision,” said she, “I saw crossways. How sad it is that I
should begin to see the sort of things I thought I saw.”

“Sit in this chair, mother,” said Mongan, “and tell me what you thought
you saw,” and he slipped a spike under her, and mac an Da’v pushed her
into the seat, and she died on the spike.

Just then there came a knocking at the door. Mac an Da’v opened it, and
there was Tibraide, standing outside, and twenty-nine of his men were
with him, and they were all laughing.

“A mile was not half enough,” said mac an Da’v reproachfully.

The Chamberlain of the fortress pushed into the room and he stared from
one Tibraide’ to the other.

“This is a fine growing year,” said he. “There never was a year
when Tibraide’s were as plentiful as they are this year. There is a
Tibraide’ outside and a Tibraide’ inside, and who knows but there are
some more of them under the bed. The place is crawling with them,” said
he.

Mongan pointed at Tibraide’.

“Don’t you know who that is?” he cried.

“I know who he says he is,” said the Chamberlain.

“Well, he is Mongan,” said Mongan, “and these twenty-nine men are
twenty-nine of his nobles from Ulster.”

At that news the men of the household picked up clubs and cudgels and
every kind of thing that was near, and made a violent and woeful attack
on Tibraide’s men The King of Leinster came in then, and when he was
told Tibraide’ was Mongan he attacked them as well, and it was with
difficulty that Tibraide’ got away to Cell Camain with nine of his men
and they all wounded.

The King of Leinster came back then. He went to Duv Laca’s room.

“Where is Tibraide’?” said he.

“It wasn’t Tibraide was here,” said the hag who was still sitting on
the spike, and was not half dead, “it was Mongan.”

“Why did you let him near you?” said the king to Duv Laca.

“There is no one has a better right to be near me than Mongan has,” said
Duv Laca, “he is my own husband,” said she.

And then the king cried out in dismay: “I have beaten Tibraide’s
people.” He rushed from the room.

“Send for Tibraide’ till I apologise,” he cried. “Tell him it was all a
mistake. Tell him it was Mongan.”



CHAPTER XVIII

Mongan and his servant went home, and (for what pleasure is greater than
that of memory exercised in conversation?) for a time the feeling of an
adventure well accomplished kept him in some contentment. But at the
end of a time that pleasure was worn out, and Mongan grew at first
dispirited and then sullen, and after that as ill as he had been on the
previous occasion. For he could not forget Duv Laca of the White Hand,
and he could not remember her without longing and despair.

It was in the illness which comes from longing and despair that he sat
one day looking on a world that was black although the sun shone, and
that was lean and unwholesome although autumn fruits were heavy on the
earth and the joys of harvest were about him.

“Winter is in my heart,” quoth he, “and I am cold already.”

He thought too that some day he would die, and the thought was not
unpleasant, for one half of his life was away in the territories of the
King of Leinster, and the half that he kept in himself had no spice in
it.

He was thinking in this way when mac an Da’v came towards him over the
lawn, and he noticed that mac an Da’v was walking like an old man.

He took little slow steps, and he did not loosen his knees when he
walked, so he went stiffly. One of his feet turned pitifully outwards,
and the other turned lamentably in. His chest was pulled inwards, and
his head was stuck outwards and hung down in the place where his chest
should have been, and his arms were crooked in front of him with the
hands turned wrongly, so that one palm was shown to the east of the
world and the other one was turned to the west.

“How goes it, mac an Da’v?” said the king.

“Bad,” said mac an Da’v.

“Is that the sun I see shining, my friend?” the king asked.

“It may be the sun,” replied mac an Da’v, peering curiously at the
golden radiance that dozed about them, “but maybe it’s a yellow fog.”

“What is life at all?” said the king.

“It is a weariness and a tiredness,” said mac an Da’v. “It is a long
yawn without sleepiness. It is a bee, lost at midnight and buzzing on
a pane. It is the noise made by a tied-up dog. It is nothing worth
dreaming about. It is nothing at all.”

“How well you explain my feelings about Duv Laca,” said the king.

“I was thinking about my own lamb,” said mac an Da’v. “I was thinking
about my own treasure, my cup of cheeriness, and the pulse of my heart.”
 And with that he burst into tears.

“Alas!” said the king.

“But,” sobbed mac an Da’v, “what right have I to complain? I am only
the servant, and although I didn’t make any bargain with the King of
Leinster or with any king of them all, yet my wife is gone away as if
she was the consort of a potentate the same as Duv Laca is.”

Mongan was sorry then for his servant, and he roused himself.

“I am going to send you to Duv Laca.”

“Where the one is the other will be,” cried mac an Da’v joyously.

“Go,” said Mongan, “to Rath Descirt of Bregia; you know that place?”

“As well as my tongue knows my teeth.”

“Duv Laca is there; see her, and ask her what she wants me to do.”

Mac an Da’v went there and returned.

“Duv Laca says that you are to come at once, for the King of Leinster is
journeying around his territory, and Kevin Cochlach, the charioteer, is
making bitter love to her and wants her to run away with him.”

Mongan set out, and in no great time, for they travelled day and night,
they came to Bregla, and gained admittance to the fortress, but just
as he got in he had to go out again, for the King of Leinster had been
warned of Mongan’s journey, and came back to his fortress in the nick of
time.

When the men of Ulster saw the condition into which Mongan fell they
were in great distress, and they all got sick through compassion for
their king. The nobles suggested to him that they should march against
Leinster and kill that king and bring back Duv Laca, but Mongan would
not consent to this plan.

“For,” said he, “the thing I lost through my own folly I shall get back
through my own craft.”

And when he said that his spirits revived, and he called for mac an
Da’v.

“You know, my friend,” said Mongan, “that I can’t get Duv Laca back
unless the King of Leinster asks me to take her back, for a bargain is a
bargain.”

“That will happen when pigs fly,” said mac an Da’v, “and,” said he, “I
did not make any bargain with any king that is in the world.”

“I heard you say that before,” said Mongan.

“I will say it till Doom,” cried his servant, “for my wife has gone
away with that pestilent king, and he has got the double of your bad
bargain.”

Mongan and his servant then set out for Leinster.

When they neared that country they found a great crowd going on the road
with them, and they learned that the king was giving a feast in honour
of his marriage to Duv Laca, for the year of waiting was nearly out, and
the king had sworn he would delay no longer.

They went on, therefore, but in low spirits, and at last they saw the
walls of the king’s castle towering before them, and a noble company
going to and fro on the lawn.



CHAPTER XIX

THEY sat in a place where they could watch the castle and compose
themselves after their journey.

“How are we going to get into the castle?” asked mac an Da’v.

For there were hatchetmen on guard in the big gateway, and there were
spearmen at short intervals around the walls, and men to throw hot
porridge off the roof were standing in the right places.

“If we cannot get in by hook, we will get in by crook,” said Mongan.

“They are both good ways,” said Mac an Da’v, “and whichever of them you
decide on I’ll stick by.”

Just then they saw the Hag of the Mill coming out of the mill which was
down the road a little.

Now the Hag of the Mill was a bony, thin pole of a hag with odd feet.
That is, she had one foot that was too big for her, so that when she
lifted it up it pulled her over; and she had one foot that was too small
for her, so that when she lifted it up she didn’t know what to do with
it. She was so long that you thought you would never see the end of her,
and she was so thin that you thought you didn’t see her at all. One of
her eyes was set where her nose should be and there was an ear in its
place, and her nose itself was hanging out of her chin, and she had
whiskers round it. She was dressed in a red rag that was really a hole
with a fringe on it, and she was singing “Oh, hush thee, my one love” to
a cat that was yelping on her shoulder.

She had a tall skinny dog behind her called Brotar. It hadn’t a tooth in
its head except one, and it had the toothache in that tooth. Every few
steps it used to sit down on its hunkers and point its nose straight
upwards, and make a long, sad complaint about its tooth; and after that
it used to reach its hind leg round and try to scratch out its tooth;
and then it used to be pulled on again by the straw rope that was round
its neck, and which was tied at the other end to the hag’s heaviest
foot.

There was an old, knock-kneed, raw-boned, one-eyed, little-winded,
heavy-headed mare with her also. Every time it put a front leg forward
it shivered all over the rest of its legs backwards, and when it put a
hind leg forward it shivered all over the rest of its legs frontwards,
and it used to give a great whistle through its nose when it was out of
breath, and a big, thin hen was sitting on its croup. Mongan looked on
the Hag of the Mill with delight and affection.

“This time,” said he to mac an Da’v, “I’ll get back my wife.”

“You will indeed,” said mac an Da’v heartily, “and you’ll get mine back
too.”

“Go over yonder,” said Mongan, “and tell the Hag of the Mill that I want
to talk to her.”

Mac an Da’v brought her over to him.

“Is it true what the servant man said?” she asked.

“What did he say?” said Mongan.

“He said you wanted to talk to me.”

“It is true,” said Mongan.

“This is a wonderful hour and a glorious minute,” said the hag, “for
this is the first time in sixty years that any one wanted to talk to me.
Talk on now,” said she, “and I’ll listen to you if I can remember how to
do it. Talk gently,” said she, “the way you won’t disturb the animals,
for they are all sick.”

“They are sick indeed,” said mac an Da’v pityingly.

“The cat has a sore tail,” said she, “by reason of sitting too close to
a part of the hob that was hot. The dog has a toothache, the horse has a
pain in her stomach, and the hen has the pip.”

“Ah, it’s a sad world,” said mac an Da’v.

“There you are!” said the hag.

“Tell me,” Mongan commenced, “if you got a wish, what it is you would
wish for?”

The hag took the cat off her shoulder and gave it to mac an Da’v.

“Hold that for me while I think,” said she.

“Would you like to be a lovely young girl?” asked Mongan.

“I’d sooner be that than a skinned eel,” said she.

“And would you like to marry me or the King of Leinster?” “I’d like to
marry either of you, or both of you, or whichever of you came first.”

“Very well,” said Mongan, “you shall have your wish.”

He touched her with his finger, and the instant he touched her all
dilapidation and wryness and age went from her, and she became so
beautiful that one dared scarcely look on her, and so young that she
seemed but sixteen years of age.

“You are not the Hag of the Mill any longer,” said Mongan, “you are
Ivell of the Shining Cheeks, daughter of the King of Munster.”

He touched the dog too, and it became a little silky lapdog that could
nestle in your palm. Then he changed the old mare into a brisk, piebald
palfrey. Then he changed himself so that he became the living image of
Ae, the son of the King of Connaught, who had just been married to Ivell
of the Shining Cheeks, and then he changed mac an Da’v into the likeness
of Ae’s attendant, and then they all set off towards the fortress,
singing the song that begins: My wife is nicer than any one’s wife, Any
one’s wife, any one’s wife, My wife is nicer than any one’s wife, Which
nobody can deny.



CHAPTER XX

The doorkeeper brought word to the King of Leinster that the son of the
King of Connaught, Ae the Beautiful, and his wife, Ivell of the Shining
Cheeks, were at the door, that they had been banished from Connaught
by Ae’s father, and they were seeking the protection of the King of
Leinster.

Branduv came to the door himself to welcome them, and the minute he
looked on Ivell of the Shining Cheeks it was plain that he liked looking
at her.

It was now drawing towards evening, and a feast was prepared for the
guests with a banquet to follow it. At the feast Duv Laca sat beside the
King of Leinster, but Mongan sat opposite him with Ivell, and Mongan put
more and more magic into the hag, so that her cheeks shone and her eyes
gleamed, and she was utterly bewitching to the eye; and when Branduv
looked at her she seemed to grow more and more lovely and more and more
desirable, and at last there was not a bone in his body as big as an
inch that was not filled with love and longing for the girl.

Every few minutes he gave a great sigh as if he had eaten too much, and
when Duv Laca asked him if he had eaten too much he said he had but
that he had not drunk enough, and by that he meant that he had not drunk
enough from the eyes of the girl before him.

At the banquet which was then held he looked at her again, and every
time he took a drink he toasted Ivell across the brim of his goblet, and
in a little while she began to toast him back across the rim of her
cup, for he was drinking ale, but she was drinking mead. Then he sent a
messenger to her to say that it was a far better thing to be the wife
of the King of Leinster than to be the wife of the son of the King of
Connaught, for a king is better than a prince, and Ivell thought that
this was as wise a thing as anybody had ever said. And then he sent a
message to say that he loved her so much that he would certainly burst
of love if it did not stop.

Mongan heard the whispering, and he told the hag that if she did what he
advised she would certainly get either himself or the King of Leinster
for a husband.

“Either of you will be welcome,” said the hag.

“When the king says he loves you, ask him to prove it by gifts; ask for
his drinking-horn first.”

She asked for that, and he sent it to her filled with good liquor; then
she asked for his girdle, and he sent her that.

His people argued with him and said it was not right that he should give
away the treasures of Leinster to the wife of the King of Connaught’s
son; but he said that it did not matter, for when he got the girl he
would get his treasures with her. But every time he sent anything to the
hag, mac an Da’v snatched it out of her lap and put it in his pocket.

“Now,” said Mongan to the hag, “tell the servant to say that you would
not leave your own husband for all the wealth of the world.”

She told the servant that, and the servant told it to the king. When
Branduv heard it he nearly went mad with love and longing and jealousy,
and with rage also, because of the treasure he had given her and might
not get back. He called Mongan over to him, and spoke to him very
threateningly and ragingly.

“I am not one who takes a thing without giving a thing,” said he.

“Nobody could say you were,” agreed Mongan.

“Do you see this woman sitting beside me?” he continued, pointing to Duv
Laca.

“I do indeed,” said Mongan.

“Well,” said Branduv, “this woman is Duv Laca of the White Hand that I
took away from Mongan; she is just going to marry me, but if you will
make an exchange, you can marry this Duv Laca here, and I will marry
that Ivell of the Shining Cheeks yonder.”

Mongan pretended to be very angry then.

“If I had come here with horses and treasure you would be in your right
to take these from me, but you have no right to ask for what you are now
asking.”

“I do ask for it,” said Branduv menacingly, “and you must not refuse a
lord.”

“Very well,” said Mongan reluctantly, and as if in great fear; “if you
will make the exchange I will make it, although it breaks my heart.”

He brought Ivell over to the king then and gave her three kisses.

“The king would suspect something if I did not kiss you,” said he, and
then he gave the hag over to the king. After that they all got drunk and
merry, and soon there was a great snoring and snorting, and very soon
all the servants fell asleep also, so that Mongan could not get anything
to drink. Mac an Da’v said it was a great shame, and he kicked some of
the servants, but they did not budge, and then he slipped out to the
stables and saddled two mares. He got on one with his wife behind him
and Mongan got on the other with Duv Laca behind him, and they rode away
towards Ulster like the wind, singing this song: The King of Leinster
was married to-day, Married to-day, married to-day, The King of Leinster
was married to-day, And every one wishes him joy.

In the morning the servants came to waken the King of Leinster, and when
they saw the face of the hag lying on the pillow beside the king, and
her nose all covered with whiskers, and her big foot and little foot
sticking away out at the end of the bed, they began to laugh, and poke
one another in the stomachs and thump one another on the shoulders, so
that the noise awakened the king, and he asked what was the matter with
them at all. It was then he saw the hag lying beside him, and he gave a
great screech and jumped out of the bed.

“Aren’t you the Hag of the Mill?” said he.

“I am indeed,” she replied, “and I love you dearly.”

“I wish I didn’t see you,” said Branduv.

That was the end of the story, and when he had told it Mongan began to
laugh uproariously and called for more wine. He drank this deeply, as
though he was full of thirst and despair and a wild jollity, but when
the Flame Lady began to weep he took her in his arms and caressed her,
and said that she was the love of his heart and the one treasure of the
world.

After that they feasted in great contentment, and at the end of the
feasting they went away from Faery and returned to the world of men.

They came to Mongan’s palace at Moy Linney, and it was not until they
reached the palace that they found they had been away one whole year,
for they had thought they were only away one night. They lived
then peacefully and lovingly together, and that ends the story, but
Bro’tiarna did not know that Mongan was Fionn.


The abbot leaned forward.

“Was Mongan Fionn?” he asked in a whisper.

“He was,” replied Cairide’.

“Indeed, indeed!” said the abbot.

After a while he continued: “There is only one part of your story that I
do not like.”

“What part is that?” asked Cairide’.

“It is the part where the holy man Tibraide’ was ill treated by that
rap--by that--by Mongan.”

Cairide’ agreed that it was ill done, but to himself he said gleefully
that whenever he was asked to tell the story of how he told the story of
Mongan he would remember what the abbot said.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Irish Fairy Tales, by James Stephens

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IRISH FAIRY TALES ***

***** This file should be named 2892-0.txt or 2892-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/9/2892/

Produced by A. Elizabeth Warren

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

